
INTRODUCTORY CHALLENGE


THE FUTURE OF E-COMMERCE
Background
E-commerce is the activity of electronically buying or selling of products on online services or over the Internet. (Wikipedia)​
First transactions took place as early as 1972​
E-commerce giants Amazon and Alibaba were founded in 1995 and 1999 respectively​
E-commerce has seen nonstop yearly growth throughout the 2010s​

Market Breakdown
China and the US contain the largest e-commerce markets​
Both countries have a market leader and several smaller players​
Alibaba in China contains a majority share of China’s e-commerce market (2018)​
Exercise
What is the next big opportunity in e-commerce?
STRUCTURED APPROACHES



Method 1: Trend Analysis
Think differently about the future.
Carry a trend to its absurd conclusion.
For example:
What does a world with 100% e-commerce transactions look like?
What would be  different about this world?
What products, service, and policies will be needed?
Method 2: Scenario Analysis
Task:​
What is the future of e-commerce?
Create four alternative futures – think of them as stories or science fiction
This question must be asked by a stakeholder (e.g., an incumbent, a startup, an investor, a government, etc.)

Possible Axes:​
Industry concentration: major players vs. fragmented market
100% online vs. mixed online/brick and mortar retail
Telepresence vs. Physical presence
Other​​

Scenario Analysis: E-Commerce
Method 3: The Next Big Thing
What is the next big thing inherent in the situation:
PEST (political, economic, social, and technological changes)
Payment methods
Logistics
The user experience
How we buy
How we find things to buy
An industry space
Who are (might be?) the main players in the space?
What products or services are missing?
How can current offerings be re-directed?
Summary
Use a structured innovation process is to build a portfolio of opportunities by
imagining different futures (including ones you do not like and do not really want),
identifying what problems might possibly be found there (e.g., what is missing in such a future, what will be needed), and
identifying the most interesting opportunities that come out of these problems (opportunities whose solution can be started today) by re-thinking current trends, user experiences, and industry spaces.
And then converting the best opportunities into well-defined problems that can actually be solved and for which a business case can be developed.

2 
INTRODUCTION


A FRAMEWORK FOR INNOVATION:
FINDING PROBLEMS WORTH WORKING ON
Getting Started
What is your big idea for a startup…?
WHY INNOVATE?


Markets Mature
At some point, market growth must slow. It may still be possible for a few firms to keep growing fast by attracting customers from competitors, but this is likely to be increasingly difficult. 
Another possibility is to expand into new geographic markets, but there are often real limits to this approach. Leading a process of industry consolidation by absorbing competitors can also bring continued growth for some time. But there are obvious limits to this source of growth as well: Even if further consolidation would be economically possible, antitrust is likely to prove a barrier. 
Thus, if a firm is to continue to grow at substantial rates, it must ultimately be by developing business opportunities beyond its original scope.
Acquisitions are one way to get into new businesses. Acquisitions readily lead to higher sale numbers and higher total profits, but the implications for value creation and profitability are less clearly positive. 
In general, it seems very hard for firms to benefit their owners by buying other firms. The difficulties are twofold. First is to avoid having all the potential value creation flow to the shareholders of the acquired firm. The second is to realize the potential gains once the transaction is completed. 

To Find Competitive Advantage
The most typical causes of innovations that shift competitive advantage are the following:
New technologies;
New or shifting buyer needs;
The emergence of a new industry segment;
Shifting input costs or availability; and
Changes in government regulation.

To Exploit Change
‘Innovation’, then, is an economic or social rather than a technical term. It can be defined the way J. B. Say defined entrepreneurship, as changing the yield of resources. Or, as a modern economist would tend to do, it can be defined in demand terms rather than in supply terms, that is, as changing the value and satisfaction obtained from resources by the consumer.
Systematic innovation therefore consists in the purposeful and organized search for changes, and in the systematic analysis of the opportunities such changes might offer for economic or social innovation.
The overwhelming majority of successful innovations exploit change. To be sure, there are innovations that in themselves constitute a major change; some of the major technical innovations, such as the Wright Brothers’ aeroplane, are examples. But these are exceptions, and fairly uncommon ones. Most successful innovations are far more prosaic; they exploit change. And thus the discipline of innovation (and it is the knowledge base of entrepreneurship) is a diagnostic discipline: a systematic examination of the areas of change that typically offer entrepreneurial opportunities. Specifically, systematic innovation means monitoring seven sources for innovative opportunity.
Entrepreneurship and Innovation
‘The entrepreneur,’ said the French economist J. B. Say around 1800, ‘shifts economic resources out of an area of lower and into an area of higher productivity and greater yield.’ But Say’s definition does not tell us who this ‘entrepreneur’ is. And since Say coined the term almost two hundred years ago, there has been total confusion over the definitions of ‘entrepreneur’ and ‘entrepreneurship’.
But to be entrepreneurial, an enterprise has to have special characteristics over and above being new and small. Indeed, entrepreneurs are a minority among new businesses. They create something new, something different; they change or transmute values.

Entrepreneurs innovate. Innovation is the specific instrument of entrepreneurship. It is the act that endows resources with a new capacity to create wealth. Innovation, indeed, creates a resource. There is no such thing as a ‘resource’ until man finds a use for something in nature and thus endows it with economic value. Until then, every plant is a weed and every mineral just another rock.
The same holds just as true in the social and economic spheres. There is no greater resource in an economy than ‘purchasing power’. But purchasing power is the creation of the innovating entrepreneur.

Principles: Finding the Best Opportunities
The Dos:
Purposeful, systematic innovation begins with the analysis of the opportunities. 
Innovation is both conceptual and perceptual. The second imperative of innovation is therefore to go out to look, to ask, to listen.
An innovation, to be effective, has to be simple and it has to be focused. It should do only one thing, otherwise, it confuses. 
Effective innovations start small. They are not grandiose. They try to do one specific thing.
A successful innovation aims at leadership.
The Don’ts:
The first is simply not to try to be clever. Innovations have to be handled by ordinary human beings, if they are to attain any size and importance at all,
Don’t diversify, don’t splinter, don’t try to do too many things at once. This is, of course, the corollary to the ‘do’: be focused!
Finally, don’t try to innovate for the future. Innovate for the present! An innovation may have long-range impact….
Finally, there are three conditions: 
Innovation is work. It requires knowledge. It often requires great ingenuity.
To succeed, innovators must build on their strengths. Successful innovators look at opportunities over a wide range. But then they ask, ‘Which of these opportunities fits me, fits this company, puts to work what we (or I) are good at and have shown capacity for in performance?’
And finally, innovation is an effect in economy and society, a change in the behaviour of customers, of teachers, of farmers, of eye surgeons – of people in general. Or it is a change in a process – that is, in how people work and produce something. Innovation therefore always has to be close to the market, focused on the market, indeed market-driven.

FINDING PROBLEMS WORTH SOLVING
Components of Innovation
The components of innovation include:
A problem worth solving
A solution that solves the problem
A business case that allows the solution to enter the market and to scale

All must be validated
Is the problem worth working on?
Does the solution address the problem effectively and efficiently?
Does the business case allow the solution to move forward and does it work for all stakeholders?
Finding Good Problems
Innovation and entrepreneurship begin with finding problems worth solving
Because not all problems are of equal value or importance

What are good problems?
Per Frans Johansson, the best innovative ideas are those which are new and valuable
Those that create a new future
How do you find them?
Traditional Answer: Get Out of the Building
From grocer to philanthropist, a man named Johns Hopkins laid out a plan to use his wealth to establish a hospital that would provide care to anyone, regardless of sex, age or race. 
This hospital would be named The Johns Hopkins Hospital and opened in 1889, with The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine four years later. 
These events marked a new era for medical education and patient care.
Example: Getting Out of the Building
A new product from six Johns Hopkins University grad students updates current IV infiltration detection tech to help cancer patients avoid a condition called lymphedema.
The term refers to a gradual buildup of lymphatic fluid in the extremities, often following cancer treatment, that causes swelling and pain. It’s treatable if caught early, but once a patient feels something wrong, it’s typically too late. 
To fight this, the students developed LymphaSense, which acts as a noninvasive patch-like sensor for patients to test fluid levels.

The Challenge of Presentism
Great innovation usually starts with a problem to solve. But great problems rarely present themselves on their own and are not always obvious. The key to groundbreaking innovation is identifying what the next great problem actually is.
Problems are discovered not only by getting out of the building, but by getting out of your head — and your current frame of reference.
And we get out of our heads by searching at different boundaries of uncertainty for opportunities: 
from the present forward (“What’s probable? What’s plausible?”) and 
from the future back (“What’s possible?”).
What is the Problem Here?
Guglielmo Marconi was an Italian electrical engineer and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1909, known for the development of a wireless telegraphy (T.S.H.) or radiotelegraphy system.
From youth, Marconi was interested in science and electricity. In the early 1890s, he began working on the idea of “wireless telegraphy” – i.e., the transmission of telegraph messages without connecting wires as used by the electric telegraph.
Or Here?
GPT-3: Where is the Problem Worth Solving?
GPT-3 refers to the AI technology offered by OpenAI, which is an artificial intelligence company that began its journey in natural language processing by using deep learning to create text-generating algorithms. Although initially fully open-source, with the increased capacity of parameters after their GPT-2 version, OpenAI has privatized their code. 
According to The New Yorker, the second iteration of this AI tool used 17 billion parameters to build the base knowledge for the deep learning algorithm. In this third version, the parameters increased by more than 10 times, now holding a whopping 175 billion parameters. This significant increase in parameters has also translated into a significant increase in applicability, as the new algorithm has opened the door for generative algorithms which actually create text-based solutions that matter, and that also makes sense.
I’ll be honest. I don’t know much about creativity. I’m not a psychologist and I’m not a creative myself. I’m just a guy who likes to read about psychology and creativity. What I can do, though, is write you an article about creativity that’s based on what I have read. That way you get a proper article, but you don’t have to pay for the expertise of a psychologist or a creative person.

Or Here?
Eiffel Tower in Different Artistic Styles
Celebrities in a New Look
Turn Bad Art into Something Passable
SEARCHING FOR GOOD OPPORTUNITIES
A Structured Process for “Doing Innovation”
Innovation under Uncertainty includes two intersecting models:
A structured process to identify problems to be solved and to generate a bank of opportunities. 
An analytical framework to identify the best opportunities – those that take advantage of high uncertainty and low risk.
How Would You Solve this Problem?
A Taxonomy of Problems
What is – possible, plausible, probable:
Un-defined – imagine the future in order to anticipate problems
Question: What might the future look like? What problems will we find there?  What’s over the horizon?
Ill-defined – find a problem worth solving
Question: What is the next big thing here?  What’s next for us? 
Well-defined – solve the problem
Question: What is the best solution to this specific problem?

Different time frames and degrees of uncertainty
Examples: Different Kinds of Questions
Well-Defined: 
How can we make a brain controlled prosthetic hand with a sense of touch (sensory feedback) for less than $1000?
Ill-Defined: What is the next big thing here?
3D printing and prosthetics
Robotics and prosthetics
Personalized prosthetics
How prosthetics are acquired 
Un-Defined: 
What is the future of prosthetics?
Problem Types
The Goal: Finding Lots of Opportunities
Linus Pauling (1901-1994), a winner of both the Nobel Prize in Chemistry and the Nobel Peace Prize, was quoted in a 1990 syndicated newspaper article: 

“I’m interested in everything. Lots of things carry over from one field to another. To get good ideas, you have to have a lot of ideas and throw away the bad ones. The knack is to recognize the problems you have some chance of solving.” 
Opportunities Are…
Opportunities are found when things don’t work as they should, or need to work better than they currently do
Opportunities are, therefore, problems to be solved 
Opportunities are interesting, intriguing, exciting; and hopefully allow us to create a different future, a future we want

But they must be researched and explored if they are to be turned into well-defined problems and thus become innovations
Which are the Best Opportunities?
Those that 
take advantage of current macro-trends,
re-imagine user experiences, and
challenge existing orthodoxies and paradigms.
Criteria:
Impact – the number of people who could be affected and how deeply their lives will change as a result
Feasibility – the ability to clearly define the problem, and thus actually solve it at a reasonable cost and within a reasonable timeframe
Personal preference
Ideas that could change the future in ways that you care about
Ideas that contain insights that are surprising, unusual, non-obvious, and fascinating (intersectional ideas)
Those that exploit uncertainty and minimize risk 
The Innovation Landscape
Uncertainty: 
Demand
Technological feasibility
Risk: 
Financial
Political
Reputational
Managerial
Not Design Thinking
Empathize, define, ideate, prototype, test

Per MIT:
Design thinking is an innovative problem-solving process rooted in a set of skills.
At a high level, the steps involved in the design thinking process are simple: first, fully understand the problem; second, explore a wide range of possible solutions; third, iterate extensively through prototyping and testing; and finally, implement through the customary deployment mechanisms.
Per IDEO:
Design thinking is a human-centered approach to innovation that draws from the designer’s toolkit to integrate the needs of people, the possibilities of technology, and the requirements for business success.
This approach… brings together what is desirable from a human point of view with what is technologically feasible and economically viable.
Phases of design thinking include:
Frame a Question—Identify a driving question that inspires others to search for creative solutions.
Gather Inspiration—Inspire new thinking by discovering what people really need.
Generate Ideas—Push past obvious solutions to get to breakthrough ideas.
Make Ideas Tangible—Build rough prototypes to learn how to make ideas better.
Test to Learn—Refine ideas by gathering feedback and experimenting forward.
Share the Story—Craft a human story to inspire others toward action.

Not DCF/Business Case
Justifying an investment in an innovative product or service requires developing a business case that includes
Responding to market realities and customer needs
Referring to published market reports
Calculating market size
Competitive analysis
Financial projections, including DCF and ROI
A formal plan (and the names of responsible parties) for “getting it done”

Not TAM SOM SAM
Summary: Innovation under Uncertainty
Use a structured approach to create a portfolio of opportunities by
Exploring un-defined spaces
Imagine alternate futures (“what’s the future of…”) and the problems that might be found there
Mining un-defined spaces for ill-defined problems 
Exploring ill-defined problems
Imagine “what’s next” for customers, industries, or society (using trends, changing tastes/preferences, changing terms of competition, etc.)
Choose the best opportunities
those where the solution is likely to be found in the high uncertainty/low risk quadrant
Turn the best opportunities into well-defined problems
Validate and solve them
Use the solution to further explore un-defined and ill-defined spaces
Our Work Together
Fall Semester:
Generate lots of ideas
Find problems worth solving
Create a portfolio of opportunities and ideas
Form teams
Select problems worth solving
Start to define and validate the problem

January Term:
Continue defining the problem
Continue validating the problem

Spring Semester:
Continue defining the problem
Continue validating the problem
Develop and validate a solution
Develop and validate the business case
Write the business plan
FITTING ALL THE PARTS TOGETHER:
 A CASE STUDY
What is the future of military medicine?

And what kinds of innovations should be developed now to address the most serious problems likely encountered by combat medics a decade from now? 

An Un-Defined Problem
For NATO, what will combat medicine look like post-Afghanistan?
Understanding the Continuum of Care
Breaking the Continuum of Care Down
Step 1: Limit the Search Space
Build an Issue Tree
Step 2: Scenario Analysis
Assumptions:
European location
Contested environment
Rapid evacuation not possible
Kinetic only

Parameters (2x2 box):
Urban / Non-urban
Single casualty / Mass casualty

Scenario Analysis
Scenario Analysis
Step 3: Create an Ill-Defined Problem
Create an ill-defined problem by intensively exploring a scenario:
What are the possibilities for field medicine in the future
when there are mass casualties
in a non-urban environment
and where rapid evacuation is not possible?

Address the ill-defined problem by creating a portfolio of innovative opportunities. 
In other words, create a list of problems worth working on by
looking at scientific trends,
talking to people, 
studying the jobs people are trying to do, 
challenging paradigms and assumptions, and
changing the current terms of competition in the relevant technological and market spaces.
Opportunity 1
Opportunity 2
Opportunity 3
Opportunity 4
Opportunity 5
Opportunity 5 (contd.)
Opportunity 6
Opportunity 7
Opportunity 8
Opportunity 9
Other Opportunities (not researched deeply)
Light compact easily transportable litters, splints, and dressings
Reduce the workload for soldiers transporting the injured.
Foldable litters & splints? Combined litter and splint device?
Comfortable litters for longer duration (assumes no transport out)
Bluetooth enabled vital statistics chest strap or similar (viz., NASA)
Data collected would be transferred with the individual from point of injury and onward.
Doctors could assess the patient's condition and suggest treatment, prioritized evac, etc. 
Man-carrying drones for evac (single person, low flying?) or robotic mules
Out of combat but available for aerial pick up.
Medical equipment drones – ability to swarm, land, and create a mobile self-assembling MTF anywhere on the battlefield
Medical advice drones – fly to the injured and provide advice on self-care (telemedicine or IBM Watson) and drop first aid provisions
Step 4: Create a Well-Defined Problem
Choose one opportunity
Create a well-defined problem from an opportunity
Problem statement: Improve the triage process to reduce casualties in both military and civilian settings.​

Solution: build a digital triage assistant that
Collects a range of frontline soldier’s health data starting from the point of injury, throughout the continuum of care
Calculates an instantaneous morality-likelihood score for each wounded soldier based off a mortality likelihood model
Iteratively improves model from data collected in Goal #1
Aids medics in immediately knowing the severity of a wounded soldier’s injuries
Collects data can be carried up the continuum of care
And therefore, also provides insight into which soldiers should be triaged first by medics, especially during mass casualty incidents

Build Another Issue Tree
Step 5: Design a Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
Embed the Innovation into a Bigger System
The Future is Here 
United States Army now preparing for combat with highly dispersed troops, high casualty rates and limited means of communication
Ukraine conflict has validated JHU student team scenarios of the future of combat medicine and the need for localized triage and medical care in the absence of aerial evacuation 
Summary: Innovation under Uncertainty
Use a structured approach to create a portfolio of opportunities by
Exploring un-defined spaces
Imagine alternate futures (“what’s the future of…”) and the problems that might be found there
Mining un-defined spaces for ill-defined problems 
Exploring ill-defined problems
Imagine “what’s next” for customers, industries, or society (using trends, changing tastes/preferences, changing terms of competition, etc.)
Choose the best opportunities
those where the solution is likely to be found in the high uncertainty/low risk quadrant
Turn the best opportunities into well-defined problems
Validate and solve them
Use the solution to further explore un-defined and ill-defined spaces
APPENDIX: THE TOOLKIT



A Framework and a Toolkit
APPENDIX:
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T
Gary Klein
(PublicAffairs: 2013, Kindle Edition)
Why is this so Hard?
Organizations stifle insights because of forces locked deep inside their DNA: they value predictability, they recoil from surprises, and they crave perfection, the absence of errors. Surprises and errors can play havoc with plans and with smooth operations. In their zeal to reduce uncertainty and minimize errors, organizations fall into the predictability trap and the perfection trap.
Insight is the opposite of predictable. Insights are disruptive. They come without warning, take forms that are unexpected, and open up unimagined opportunities. Insights get in the way of progress reviews because they reshape tasks and even revise goals. They carry risks—unseen complications and pitfalls that can get you in trouble.
Business organizations treat disruptive insights and innovations with suspicion…defining performance by what can be objectively measured and downplaying the rest.
These forces—the need for predictability and the need for perfection (avoidance of errors)—aren’t values that organizations choose. They seem to be inherent in the very nature of organizations.
Some of the activities listed in the table have definite benefits: having standards, having management controls, conducting progress reviews, expecting people to justify their conclusions, using checklists, setting up schedules. The problem arises when they are pursued with so much zeal that they interfere with insights.

Perfection and Predictability
I am defining “perfection” as the absence of errors. Organizations naturally gravitate toward reducing errors. Errors are easy to define, easy to measure, and easy to manage. The quest for perfection, for mistake-free performance, can be thought of as the War on Error. It is right up there with the quest for predictability. These are both inherent in running an organization that depends on managing people and projects. In well-ordered situations, with clear goals and standards and stable conditions, the pursuit of perfection makes sense. But not when we face complex and chaotic conditions, with standards that keep evolving.
…
Checklists and procedures ensure predictability. They work best when all the uncertainties have been resolved and the practitioners converge on a standard way to work safely, efficiently, and effectively. These processes work best in well-ordered situations with clearly understood tasks. Unfortunately, organizations often are tempted to use them in complex situations with ambiguous tasks.
…
However, insights can take us beyond perfection. They can show us ways to improve on the original plan. 

Improving Performance
To improve performance, we need to do two things. The down arrow is what we have to reduce, errors. The up arrow is what we have to increase, insights. Performance improvement depends on doing both of these things.
When we put too much energy into eliminating mistakes, we’re less likely to gain insights. Having insights is a different matter from preventing mistakes.
…easier for managers to cut down on mistakes than to encourage insights. Mistakes are visible, costly, and embarrassing.
…two mysteries. The first was, What sparks an insight? What happens that lets us make sense of a jumble of unconnected and sometimes contradictory facts, events, and impressions? Once I got going on that one, a second mystery arose: What prevents us from grasping an insight? Even when it sits dangling in front of our eyes, ripe for the plucking?

The Act of Insight
Stories are a way we frame and organize the details of a situation. There are other types of frames besides stories, such as maps and even organizational wiring diagrams that show where people stand in a hierarchy. My work centers on stories because they are common ways we frame the events in the situations we encounter. These kinds of stories organize all kinds of details about a situation and depend on a few core beliefs we can call “anchors,” because they are fairly stable and anchor the way we interpret the other details. In some later research I found that most of these stories build on only three or four anchors.
...So I had a working definition of insight—an unexpected shift to a better story—along with the ways insights transform us. I also had some ideas about what makes insights unique. Compared with routine problem solving, insights aren’t conscious or deliberate. They come without warning. Our minds do their heavy lifting without our awareness.
Insights are unique in some other ways. When they do appear, they are coherent and unambiguous. They don’t come as part of a set of possible answers. When we have the insight, we think, “Oh yes, that’s it.” We feel a sense of closure. This sense of closure produces a feeling of confidence in the insight.
…As a friend summarized all these transformations, “Insight is when it happens, everything that happens afterward is different.”

The Triple Path Model
The Triple Path Model shows why earlier accounts aren’t wrong as much as they are incomplete. They restrict themselves to a single path. 
Researchers and theorists …who describe insight as escaping from fixation and impasses are referring to the creative desperation path. 
Researchers who emphasize seeing associations and combinations of ideas are referring to the connection path. 
Researchers who describe insight as reformulating the problem or restructuring how people think have gravitated to the contradiction path. None of them are wrong. 
The Triple Path Model of insight illustrates why people seem to be talking past each other. It’s because they’re on different paths.
Multiple Paths
I’ve combined the connections, coincidences, and curiosities in the Triple Path Model. They have the same dynamic: to build on a new potential anchor. They have the same trigger: our thinking is stimulated when we notice the new anchor. Coincidences and curiosities aren’t insights in themselves; they start us on the path to identifying a new anchor that we connect to the other beliefs we hold. Connections, coincidences, and curiosities have the same activity: to combine the new anchor with others. This path to insight doesn’t force us to abandon other anchors. It lets us build a new story that shifts our understanding. This path has a different motivation, a different trigger, and a different activity from the contradiction and the creative desperation paths. Nevertheless, like the other two paths, the outcome is the same: an unexpected shift in the story.
This shift isn’t a minor adjustment. It means changing the core components, the anchors, used in the story. With contradictions and creative desperation, some of the previous anchors are discarded. With connections, a new anchor is added. In all the paths the anchors in the story after we make an insight are different from the ones we started with.
Each of the three paths, the contradiction path, the connection path, and the creative desperation path, gets sparked in a different way. And each operates in a different fashion: to embrace an anomaly that seems like a weak anchor in a frame, to overturn that weak anchor, or to add a new anchor.
The bottom of the diagram of the Triple Path Model shows different routes to the outcome. It shows some direct routes from the three strategies, but also some crossovers. That’s because many of the insights in my sample relied on more than one path.
Multiple paths are the rule, not the exception. The diagram doesn’t show all possible blends, which would get complicated. Most of the blends relied at some point on the connection path, and so I have portrayed the other two paths joining the connection path.

Connections
The person making the discovery gets some new piece of information and sees how it combines with other information to form a new idea. Sometimes the person sees a new way to combine different kinds of information even if none of them are new.
The strategy offers a clear image of insights as connecting the dots. And it suggests that we can increase insights by exposing ourselves to lots of different ideas that might help us form new connections.
…
These examples come across as connecting the dots because I haven’t told you about all the non-dots. The non-dots would have slowed the stories down, but they are an important part of each insight—determining which dots to connect. Anyone can connect the dots if we remove the non-dots and clarify the ambiguous dots and group the dots that look different but are really the same. If all that is left is a set of unique and valid dots, then the job of connecting the dots becomes much easier. If we leave in all the ambiguities, then the connection gets trickier.
The connection path thrives on having lots of ideas swirling around and on making accidental linkages. The more swirl and turbulence, the greater the chance for a discovery.

Contradictions, Coincidences, Curiosity
The contradiction path to insights seems to follow a common script: we encounter an anomaly, we resist the temptation to discard it, we give it credence and imagine that it is valid, and then we revise the rest of our beliefs to make it all fit. Usually we have to discard some of our earlier beliefs, even major ones that have anchored our understanding up to now. 
Contradiction insights send us on the road to a better story. They signal that there’s something seriously wrong with the story we’re currently telling ourselves.

Contradictions are different from curiosity insights. Curiosities make us wonder what’s going on, whereas contradictions make us doubt—“That can’t be right.” Contradictions between theory and evidence, between expectations and observations….
We are built to notice associations and coincidences, and we are also built to detect anomalies, inconsistencies, irregularities. We are built to attend to cues that violate our expectancies and arouse our curiosity. We are built to be surprised.
Are contradictions really insights, or are they what lead to an insight? They certainly lead to insights, to the better story. I believe they also count as an insight. Noticing a contradiction shifts the way we understand things.

When it comes to ways for gaining insights, the Triple Path Model describes different routes we might take. We use the contradiction path to notice, search for, and apply inconsistencies and anomalies. We use the connection path to increase our exposure to novel ideas. When we get stuck, we use critical thinking methods to locate and correct flawed assumptions and beliefs. Now we can cut through some confusion about ways to achieve insights. Is it important to be exposed to lots of different ideas? Perhaps for those using the connection path, but not for the others. Is the insight process a matter of breaking through fixation and impasses? For situations involving the desperation path, but not for the others.
Creative Desperation
Creative desperation, a fifth insight strategy, is very different from connecting ideas or noticing coincidences or curiosities or contradictions. Creative desperation requires finding a way out of a trap that seems inescapable.
Both the contradiction cases and the cases of creative desperation directed people’s attention to outliers—important beliefs that weren’t firmly supported. However, in the desperation cases people did not look for ways to reframe their understanding around the weak, anomalous anchor. Just the reverse. People who are in desperate straits attack the weak anchor instead of embracing it. In times of desperation, we actively search for an assumption we can reverse. We don’t seek to imagine the implications if the assumption was valid. Rather, we try to improve the situation by eliminating the assumption.
Notice that creative desperation is more conscious and deliberate than spotting connections, coincidences, curiosities, and contradictions. People aren’t accidentally stumbling onto insights. They are actively searching for them. The creative desperation path requires us to critically examine our assumptions to detect any that are tripping us up.


I have read several accounts of this incident, but none of them explains Dodge’s insight. He invented the idea of an escape fire as an act of creative desperation. So I am forced to imagine where the insight came from. I imagine Dodge and the crew running for their lives, dropping their tools, realizing they are trapped. I try to imagine Dodge’s beliefs about what is going on. Four beliefs in particular seem to anchor Dodge’s understanding. One anchor is the uphill slope. It favors the fire, not the runners, and it is getting steeper. A second anchor is the fire behind me. It is picking up speed. Perhaps a third anchor is any island of safety I might find. If I could get to the top of the ridge, the fire would stop racing after me. Or if I could find a rocky patch, the fire might leave me alone because it wouldn’t have any fuel. I see a rocky area way up ahead (the other two survivors reached these rocks and took protection there), but I know I can’t get there in time. It is about 200 yards away, uphill yards, with the fire perhaps thirty seconds behind me. A fourth anchor is the heavy dry grass I am running through, bunchgrass and cheatgrass. It is the fuel that the fire is eating. I don’t spend any time thinking about how to change the slope of the valley walls or beat the fire back. These anchors are part of my situation, but beyond my control. I can’t reach the rocky areas on the ridge before the fire will catch me. But maybe I can do something to this last anchor, to the fuel. How can I neutralize the fuel? Of course! I can burn it! Fire, my enemy, can also be my friend. I light the escape fire to race up the slope ahead of me, and I dive into the hot ashes, my sanctuary from the blowup. In my imaginary account of Dodge’s thinking, he is looking for any assumption that he can overturn. When he finds one, the grass fuel, he has an escape plan.

Summary: Multiple Paths to Insight
…five different strategies for gaining insights: connections, coincidences, curiosities, contradictions, and creative desperation. 
Did the incident rely on a person making a connection? 
Did the person notice a coincidence as a trigger for the insight? 
Was the insight triggered by some curiosity—an odd fact or event? 
Did it depend on seeing a contradiction? 
Or was the person stuck, desperately (creatively) seeking some way out of an impasse?

APPENDIX: BECOMING AN INNOVATOR

Becoming a Creative Thinker	
Creative thinking brings about new things—innovations—ranging from solutions to simple puzzles and riddles to ideas and inventions that have radically altered our world. 
Creative people are those who produce such innovations, and the creative process consists of the psychological processes involved in bringing about innovations.
There is a relatively close relationship between creative thinking and other forms of cognition, such as problem solving, reasoning, and the use of memory. 
That is, creative thinking is not different from ordinary thinking—the thinking that we use in carrying out our day-to-day activities. 
Developing Thinking Tools
…the world’s most creative people tell us how in their own words and deeds; in their own explorations of their own minds at work. What they find as individuals, when taken as a whole, is a common set of thinking tools at the heart of creative understanding. 
These tools include (but are not necessarily limited to) 
observing, 
imaging, 
abstracting, 
recognizing patterns, 
forming patterns, 
analogizing, 
body thinking, 
empathizing, 
dimensional thinking, 
modeling, 
playing, 
transforming, and 
synthesizing.

Creative Thinking is Ordinary Thinking
Although the term thinking is one that we all use all the time, when asked to define it precisely, one realizes that ordinary thinking is a complex activity. The phrase “I’m thinking” can refer to any of a large group or family of (not necessarily independent) activities, some of which are the following. 
Remembering something 
Imagining some event that you witnessed (which depends on memory) 
Planning how to carry out some activity before doing it (which depend on both imagination and memory) 
Anticipating the outcome of some action (which may depend on imagination) 
Judging whether the outcome of an anticipated action will he acceptable (which may depend on imagination and judgment) 
Deciding between two alternative plans of action (which may depend on imagination and judgment) 
Determining the consequences of some events that have occurred, through deductive reasoning (which may or may not depend on imagination) 
Perceiving a general pattern in a set of specific experiences, through inductive reasoning 
Comprehending a verbal message 
Recognizing that two statements are contradictory 
Interpreting a picture or diagram 
If creative thinking is ordinary thinking, it should be constructed from those basic cognitive activities. We should, for example, find remembering to be important in creativity, as well as logical reasoning, both induction and deduction; we should see planning, including anticipation and correction of potential errors; we should see examples of comprehend of verbal and nonverbal information; and so forth.
Learning to Orchestrate Cognitive Components
When an individual is trying to solve a problem, he or she “orchestrates” or organizes a subset of the cognitive components of thinking in order to bring about the solution. 
So problem solving is the result of the coordination of those cognitive components of ordinary thinking, and the general characteristics of ordinary thinking just listed come about as the result of that organized activity. 
The reason our ordinary thought has structure, for example, is that problem solving depends on, among other things, memory and planning.
Gaining a Broad Perspective
…low-uncertainty domains were characterized by linear progression with more obvious next steps and more patents that were moderately useful. 
In low-uncertainty domains, teams of specialists were more likely to author useful patents. 
In high-uncertainty domains—where the fruitful questions themselves were less obvious—teams that included individuals who had worked on a wide variety of technologies were more likely to make a splash. 
The higher the domain uncertainty, the more important it was to have a high-breadth team member.


Conclusion: Becoming an Innovator
There is a direct connection between problem solving and creative thinking.
When an individual is trying to solve a problem, he or she “orchestrates” or organizes a subset of the cognitive components of thinking in order to bring about the solution. 
Therefore, creative thinking is ordinary thinking and is constructed from basic cognitive activities, e.g. remembering, imagining, planning, anticipating, judging, deciding, determining, perceiving, comprehending, recognizing, interpreting

Per Abbot Usher:  For purposes of generalized exposition, innovation can be formalized as a genetic sequence of four steps:
Perception of a problem, an unfilled want whose gratification is made possible by the presence of some fortuitous conditions
Setting of the stage, which serves as the basis for providing mediated contingencies that engender systematic efforts to find solutions to perceived problems through trial and error
Act of insight, by which the essential solution of the problem is found
The critical revision, where the solution is studied critically and understood in its fullness

The Promising Startup
The promising new venture’s ability to compete depends on
ability to persuade stakeholders to support an uncertain enterprise
entrepreneur’s capacity to execute
foresight into the direction, longevity, and consequences of market changes
creativity of underlying concept
And overcoming the hurdles of
insufficient margin potential
insufficient sales
insufficient capital
Therefore the decision to launch a new venture depends on
assessment of viability
attractiveness
fit
There is an inverse relation between the data available to analyze an opportunity and its attractiveness.  Assessing an opportunity, developing a strategy to exploit it, and following through (i.e. execution) requires judgment – there is no fixed formula.

3.
UN-DEFINED PROBLEMS


Tools for exploring un-defined problems
Problem Types
Un-Defined Problems
Goal is to think deeply about the future in order to understand what is over the horizon and the opportunities and problems that might possibly be found there
Examples:
What is the future of personal mobility?
What is the future of work?
What will the transition to clean energy look like?
What problems and opportunities will be found in these futures?
Example: What is the Future of Medical Care?
Possibilities:
Precision medicine
Big data
Early cancer detection
Immunotherapy
Example: What is the Future of War?
Land
Sea
Air 
Space
Cyber
Cognitive
Example: What is the Future of Education?
Henricus de Alemannia with students in a medieval university, by Laurentius de Voltolina, second half 14th century
Kupferstichkabinett Berlin

https://sites.google.com/site/lifeduringthemedievaltimes/education


What is the Future of the City? Our City?
The City of the Future Will Be Shaped by These 7 Factors:
Denser but healthier cities
Infrastructure for social equity
Design for resilience and sustainability
A return to the “medieval city-state”?
On-demand mobility
The public-private conundrum
Data and design
Example: What is our Energy Future?
Example: What is the Future of the Grid?
Tools
Trending to the absurd
Scenario analysis
Systems analysis
Redteaming

METHOD 1: TRENDING TO THE ABSURD

Example: The First Plane Launched from a Ship
Eugene Ely made the first carrier takeoff on November 14, 1910.
After less than five minutes in the air, Ely set the plane down on a nearby beach. 
He had flown less than 3 miles.





Eugene Ely flies his Curtiss Pusher biplane from the USS Birmingham, in Hampton Roads, Virginia, on November 14, 1910. 
31 Years Later
But Only a Year Before
Example: Number of Horses 

Now What is the Trend to the Absurd?

Example: Water
Think differently about the future by carrying a trend to its absurd conclusion.
For example:
What if water were so scarce that all you had was a liter of water each day?
Example: What if Refugees Can Never Go Home?
In recent decades, as risks of fragility, conflict, violence, climate change, and famine have soared, the number of people fleeing their homes and seeking refuge has risen to 27 million. By 2050, it is projected to quadruple. A significant share of current migrants—and an even larger share of future climate change refugees—will not return to their home countries. 
Class Exercise
What are some of the biggest changes to our everyday lives?  
Make a list.
Research one.  What is changing and how fast?
Carry this trend to its absurd conclusion.
Describe this world.
How will people live in this world?
What will their lives look like?
What new specific problems will this world have?
Example: Moore’s Law
Note: In the Moore’s Law example, problems were obvious and led to innovation in circuit substrates, etching machines, and ultimately to the concept of quantum computing. 
Example: Urbanization
Note: In the Urbanization trend shown, there are many different potential problems, including political, economic, social, and technological, as well as others including legal and environmental
The Process
Choose a domain of interest to you
Identify relevant trends in that domain
Make a list.
Research one.  What is changing and how fast?
Carry this trend to its absurd conclusion – ask questions like
What if everything were…
What if everyone were to do…
What if nobody were to do…
Describe this world:
How will people live in this world?
What will their lives look like?
What new specific problems will people in this world have?
What is missing in this world? 
What products, services, and policies will be needed?  
What can help prevent (or slow down) unwanted trends?
Conclusion: What problems will we find in the future?  What opportunity spaces are worth working on today?
Examples
Examples:
A world where you can never throw anything away
A world where you can never fish in the ocean
A world where we never see a doctor
A world where all learning is online 
A world where nobody has any work to do
A world where nobody owns anything
A world where nobody believes the news
A world with no fossil fuels
A world where nobody travels (or the opposite)
Your choice??
Exercise: Trend Analysis and Opportunities
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – what is the space you explored?  Which trend did you carry to its absurd conclusion?  Show your research.
What might this world look like?  How will people live in this world?
What kinds of ill-defined problems will be found there? 
Think in terms of use cases, i.e. how people will live in this future:
What:  What are the problems? [describe in detail] 
Who:  Who has these problems? [describe who is affected: consumers, sellers, regulators, etc.]
Why:  Why do they have these problems? [could be due to new factors in the trend, new types of issues encountered, new types of needs in that specific future, etc.]
For example, in these use cases, what products, services, and policies will be needed?  
Where are the big opportunities (maximum 3)?
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (opportunities), not the solution
METHOD 2:
SCENARIO ANALYSIS

How to Use Scenario Analysis
Choose a domain of interest to you
Create alternative possible futures by
Framing the challenge 
Gathering background information (e.g., PEST) 
Identifying driving forces – most important and most uncertain
These driving forces can be thought as the two most prominent trends
Generating four scenarios 
Fleshing them out and create story lines
Thinking about the problems in each future and what products, services, and policies will be needed

Not the Nine Box Matrix
Example: What is the Future of Healthcare in the US?
Step 1: Do Your Research
Trends:
Telehealth (Method of Delivery)
Technology
Robotic Surgery
Use of big data in personalized treatment
Use of ML and AI to discover novel therapeutics
Strong Information Systems for data sharing
Healthcare Payer/Funding
Medical Tourism
Population Health Management
Preventative Care
Step 2: Identify Possible Axes
Use the identified trends to formulate axes:
Healthcare Payer: Nationalized vs. Privatized
Technology: Telehealth vs. In Person Visits
Medical Tourism: In Country vs. Out Country
Automation in Treatment and Diagnosis: Robotic vs. Physician 
Primary Provider: Team vs. Single-person 
Treatment Strategy: Preventative vs. Reactive
Step 3: Build the 2x2 Matrix
Step 4: Fill in the Matrix
Step 5: Where are the Opportunities?
What problems will we find in these alternative futures:
What new products will be needed?
What new services be needed?
What new policies will be needed?
Alternatively: What do we have to do now to prevent such a future?
Class Exercise
What is our Climate Future?
Step one: construct a basic scenario analysis:
Define the axes
Name the scenarios
Describe the scenarios
Step two: what products, services, or policies will be needed?  I.e., what is missing in each future?  
Think in terms of use cases, i.e. how people will live in this future and what they will experience
Scenario Analysis: Climate Future
Examples: Choosing Axes
Examples: What are the possible axes for
the future of health and well-being.
the future of life at home.
the future of play and entertainment.
the future of shopping and consumption.
the future of learning.
the future of work.
the future of communication and information.
the future of travel and mobility.
the future battlefield.
the future of space.
Your choice??
Exercise: Prepare a Scenario Analysis
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Choose a domain of interest to you
Include major trends in the space 
Show your research
List possible axes
Include your scenario analysis (2x2 box with axes):
Part 1: Scenario titles/names with diagrams
Part 2: Description of scenario in detail including situation:
Characteristics (i.e., how is this different from today)
Typical use case (i.e., if I were to live in thus future, how would I do things; what would my daily life look like?)
Make sure the four scenarios parallel each other


Finding Problems Worth Solving
Review your scenario analysis
What problems worth solving might be found there?
What products, services, and policies will be needed?
Where are the  opportunities?
Option 1: Intensive
Option 2: Extensive
Option 1: Diving Deep in a Scenario
Intensively explore a single scenario.
Identify problems that could be found there by making lists of opportunities:
What problems will be found in that future?
What specific user problems does the scenario reveal? 
What parts of the scenario can be combined in new and surprising ways?
What products, services, and policies will be needed?
Think in terms of use cases.

Option 2: Look for Commonalities among Scenarios
Look extensively across scenarios (i.e., do not dive deep into any one of them)
What problem(s) is (are) common to all (or some) scenarios?
Think in terms of:
common inputs
common outcomes
common uncertainties
What are the opportunities that will impact all (or most) of the future scenarios?
I.e., what actions can you take today that will prepare you for any future?
What products, services, and policies will be needed?
Think in terms of use cases.
The Process
Part I
Choose a domain of interest to you.
Research the space and identify trends.
Use the trends to prepare a list of possible axes.  
Choose the two you think will be most fruitful.
Iterate as necessary
Create a 2x2 scenario analysis:
Step one: label them and use pictures
Step two: flesh them out and create parallel story lines

Part II
Focus on the scenario(s) that make you most uncomfortable
Explore the scenario(s) for opportunities:
What is missing in this future? 
What products, services, and policies will be needed?  
Conclusion: What problems will we find in the future?  What opportunity spaces are worth working on today?

Exercise: Scenario Analysis and Opportunities
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Using the scenario analysis you developed, choose an intensive or extensive approach (or both)
What kinds of ill-defined problems can you identify (e.g., what is missing; what will people need)? 
Think in terms of use cases, i.e. how people will live in each scenario:
What:  What are the problems? [describe in detail] 
Who:  Who has these problems? [describe who is affected: consumers, sellers, regulators, etc.]
Why:  Why do they have these problems? [could be due to new factors in the scenario, new types of issues encountered, new types of needs in that specific future, etc.]
For example, in these use cases, what products, services, and policies will be needed?  
Where are the opportunities (maximum 3)?
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (opportunities), not the solution
METHOD 3:
SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
What are Systems?
﻿A system is an interconnected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something. 
If you look at that definition closely for a minute, you can see that a system must consist of three kinds of things: 
elements, 
interconnections, and 
a function or purpose.
﻿Systems can be embedded in systems, which are embedded in yet other systems. 
Is there anything that is not a system? Yes—a conglomeration without any particular interconnections or function. Sand scattered on a road by happenstance is not, itself, a system.
﻿A system is more than the sum of its parts. It may exhibit adaptive, dynamic, goal-seeking, self-preserving, and sometimes evolutionary behavior.
Nested Hierarchies
Evolution of tobacco control approaches toward system thinking.
Another Example

Example: What is the Future of Submarine Warfare?
Trending to the Absurd
If this trend continues into 1930, the great power navies would have many thousands of submarines: 
What are the implications?
What are the opportunities for innovation?

What are the Implications For…
Sailors (they need to be trained and led – What will a submarine corps look like?)
Submarine subsystems (How can individual subsystems be made to work together more effectively?)
Submarine itself (How can the overall performance of the submarine be improved?)
Battle or campaign (How should submarines be armed, deployed, and resupplied to achieve maximum effect?)
What should the national policy be for their employment? (Should they attack civilian ships? Should commerce or warships be the main focus of naval strategy?)

Where are the opportunities for innovation?
How can sailors and subsystems be made more efficient/effective/productive within the system?
How can subsystems be made to work better together to improve the overall performance of the submarine?
How can communications and interactions among submarines, and with the rest of the navy, be made more effective?
How can the purpose/meaning of naval warfare be re-imagined?

The Process
Choose a  domain of interest to you
Identify the key elements (human and material) and sub-systems in that domain
Place the domain within a larger system of nested hierarchies
Prepare a systems map showing the hierarchies
Identify relevant trends in that domain
What is changing and how fast?
Take one trend and carry it to its absurd conclusion
What are the resulting innovation opportunities:
How can we make the elements within the system more efficient/effective/productive?
How can we make the interactions among the elements of the system more effective?
How can we improve the overall performance of the domain of interest?
How can we re-imagine the purpose/meaning of the entire system.
Examples
What is the future of
teen mental health
fake meat
schools
care for disabled adults
news
recycling
eldercare
social media
marriage
cities
office buildings
Your choice??


Exercise: Systems Analysis
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – choose a domain of interest to you. Ask “What is the future of…?” 
Identify the key elements in that domain
Place the domain within a larger system of nested hierarchies
Prepare a systems map showing the hierarchies
Identify relevant trends in that domain
What is changing and how fast?
Show your research
Take one trend and carry it to its absurd conclusion
What are the implications for the rest of the system?
Where are the opportunities (minimum 3) to improve the overall performance of the domain of interest by 
making the elements more efficient/productive within the system;
making the interactions among the elements of the system more effective; and
re-imagining the purpose/meaning of the entire system?
APPENDIX: EXAMPLE OF
SCENARIO ANALYSIS
How to Use Scenario Analysis
Choose a domain of interest to you
Create alternative possible futures by
Framing the challenge 
Gathering background information (e.g., PEST) 
Identifying driving forces – most important and most uncertain
These driving forces can be thought as the two most prominent trends
Generating four scenarios 
Fleshing them out and create story lines
Thinking about the problems in each future and what products, services, and policies will be needed

Example: What is the Future of Education?
Task:​ What does the future of education look like?
First identify important near- and long-term trends
Create four alternative futures – think of them as stories or science fiction
Then ask what products, services, or policies will be needed (i.e., what is missing?) – think in terms of use cases
Where are the opportunities?

Possible Axes (use current trends and/or constraints):​
Delivery method
Method of instruction 
Degree/credentialling model
Degree of globalization
Other??​​

Scenario Analysis for Education
Descriptions of the Scenarios
The Goal: Opportunities from Scenario Analysis
APPENDIX:
SCENARIO PLANNING
Pierre Wack
Forecasting
Scenario Planning
Scenario planning is NOT prediction.  It is a process to create a portfolio of possible futures, each representing a different way your business landscape could look in a few years, and not just the landscape, but also the players who inhabit it—your competitors, customers, suppliers, employees, and other stakeholders. The scenarios will naturally differ from each other in some key aspects, probably even dramatically so, but in its essential makeup, each one will be realistic and entirely possible, given your reading of today’s trends. Based on these different scenarios, you and your planning team can then sit down and formulate more flexible strategies that ensure your organization has the agility to compete in whichever future does in fact come to pass—even one that is different again from the scenarios envisaged.
The essence of leadership, therefore, is to be constantly gaming the future—grasping its possibilities, communicating a vision of the role you want your organization to play in this new future landscape, and inspiring your team to help you make that vision a reality.
Exploration Plus Preparation
Scenario planning doesn’t try to predict an ironclad picture of how the future will turn out. …Instead, scenario planning aims to illuminate and explore different ways the future might realistically develop. The scenarios generated by this thinking (always more than one, as we’ll see in a moment) should be regarded as insightful indicators of what could come to pass in the future, depending on the breaks. The idea is that this mix of trends and developments will make a particular kind of future more likely. 
Scenarios are therefore stories that reveal how a certain future constellation of market and environmental factors would look and feel. But alas, a scenario is not a prophecy that any particular future will actually come to pass. If only it were that easy! By going through a scenario planning process, you’re acknowledging that predicting “the” future is not possible and that instead, there are myriad forces, interacting and feeding off each other, that will be driving your organization toward some unknown future.
“I can’t see the future, but I have to plan for it anyway.” That’s the CEO’s classic dilemma.

…the function of planning is to explore these possible futures and then confidently take the steps needed to improve your organization’s flexibility and responsiveness to the different opportunities and threats these futures may bring your way. Exploration plus preparation: That’s what planning’s all about.

The Process
However, even though there’s no one-size-fits-all approach, the scenario planning process as conducted by most experts usually proceeds according to a similar logic, which means....which means that it is likely to include some variation of the following six steps: 
Framing the challenge 
Gathering information 
Identifying driving forces 
Defining the future’s critical “either/or” uncertainties 
Generating the scenarios 
Fleshing them out and creating story lines
By following this procedure, you will end up with a number of detailed scenarios. Now you have to do something with them, which requires an additional couple of steps if you want the scenarios to result in something of practical value: 
Validating the scenarios and identifying further research needed 
Assessing their implications and defining possible responses 
Identifying signposts 
Monitoring and updating the scenarios as time goes on What this all comes down to is using the scenarios to help you develop a better strategic plan.


1. Framing The Challenge
The most general and wide-ranging application for scenario planning is simply to reveal insights into future opportunities (and threats) that would affect the organization’s overarching mission.
2. Information Gathering
You cannot create a coherent future scenario without understanding (or at least knowing something about) the key trends that are happening now and that, in the fullness of time, will affect your organization and will give the scenarios their contours, if not their shape and color.

How can you zero in quickly on the most essential factors that could prove influential—even critical—to your future success? The best way is through personal interviews. 
These are so useful that I recommend scenario planners conduct interviews even if they also have an extensive library available of excellent, unimpeachable data. Interviewees bring subjective opinion and subtle judgment into the equation, but also imagination and blue-sky thinking—all based on experience. All of these things are valuable. 
Who to interview? 
What to ask? 
Identify a number of knowledgeable, opinionated people—preferably stakeholders in your future success, or people with an interest in how your environment will develop. How many interviews should you conduct? Cast your net as widely as you can. You should talk to at least as many people as there will be in the group that will meet to carry out the scenario planning exercise; some planners recommend a ratio of three or even five interviewees to one workshop participant.

If you could see 10 years into the future, what two or three things would you look for that would help you understand how the future has turned out?

3. Identifying Driving Forces
﻿Now we come to the workshop itself, the crucible in which the participants meet, discuss, argue, and (we hope) finally agree on certain key attributes of the future and craft scenarios based on these choices.
What exactly is a driving force? In a nutshell, a driving force is something with the potential to bring about significant change in the future. It may be a trend, already clearly defined and understood—for example, the falling fertility rate in Italy, which will have a fairly predictable impact on the number of Italians who will be 20 years old two decades from now. Another kind of driving force is a variable that has the potential to change the future in significant ways but is not very predictable as it is itself dependent on several factors. A good example is the price of oil.
The classic tool for helping generate a list of driving forces is the “PEST” model. 
There are other models out there that include additional categories, such as “Environmental” (which turns PEST into STEEP). Probably the most exhaustive one that I’ve seen breaks driving forces down into a whopping 10 categories: Social, Technological, Economic, Business methods, Natural resources, Political, Demographic, International, Legal, Environmental

Pest Analysis
The basic PEST analysis includes four factors:
Political factors are basically how the government intervenes in the economy. Specifically, political factors have areas including tax policy, labour law, environmental law, trade restrictions, tariffs, and political stability. Political factors may also include goods and services which the government aims to provide or be provided …and those that the government does not want to be provided…. Furthermore, governments have a high impact on the health, education , and infrastructure of a nation.
Economic factors include economic growth, interest rates, exchange rates, inflation rate. These factors greatly affect how businesses operate and make decisions. For example, interest rates affect a firm’s cost of capital and therefore to what extent a business grows and expands. Exchange rates can affect the costs of exporting goods and the supply and price of imported goods in an economy.
Social factors include the cultural aspects and health consciousness, population growth rate, age distribution, career attitudes and emphasis on safety. High trends in social factors affect the demand for a company's products and how that company operates. For example, the ageing population may imply a smaller and less-willing workforce (thus increasing the cost of labour). Furthermore, companies may change various management strategies to adapt to social trends caused from this (such as recruiting older workers).
Technological factors include technological aspects like R&D activity, automation, technology incentives and the rate of technological change. These can determine barriers to entry, minimum efficient production level and influence the outsourcing decisions. Furthermore, technological shifts would affect costs, quality, and lead to innovation.

Expanding the analysis to PESTLE or PESTEL adds:
Legal factors include discrimination law, consumer law, antitrust law, employment law, and health and safety law. These factors can affect how a company operates, its costs, and the demand for its products.
Environmental factors include ecological and environmental aspects such as weather, climate, and climate change, which may especially affect industries such as tourism, farming, and insurance. Furthermore, growing awareness of the potential impacts of climate change is affecting how companies operate and the products they offer, both creating new markets and diminishing or destroying existing ones.

4. Defining The Future’s Critical “Either/Or” Uncertainties 
Now it’s time to home in on the key unknowns for the future—the ones that can make the biggest difference. The clusters of driving forces derived in the previous step help you identify what these might be.

That’s not to say that all uncertainties are created equal. There are many things we don’t know with 100 percent certainty about the future, but we do know enough to make an educated guess. Demographic changes, for example, are largely predetermined by long-term trends. Their degree of uncertainty is very low. Not so with many other trends (e.g., new technologies), which may come screaming out of the blue, taking the market and the world by complete surprise. In addition, for any given organization, some of the uncertainties about the future are more important than others. Their potential impact is greater. 
If I’m planning a picnic two weeks from Saturday, two uncertainties I will be confronted with are the weather and the pesky, ever-fluctuating price of cheese. Neither is known, but the weather will have a far greater impact on the success of my outing than how much I have to pay for the cheese.

The goal is to identify the two most critical uncertainties, i.e., the two driving forces, trends, or developments that combine the greatest degree of uncertainty with the greatest potential impact on the future success of the organization or the outcome of the project.



Prioritizing
Either/Or
In real life, not every trend results in nice, clean, either/or, black-or-white outcome. Shades of gray predominate. 
But in order to construct scenarios that have the narrative power to illuminate stark differences between alternative futures, it’s important to think of the two critical uncertainties as delineating two either/or situations at the same time.

5. Generating The Scenarios
6. Fleshing Them Out And Creating Story Lines
The scenarios now have parameters and names. What comes next is to expand the basic idea of each one and add meat to the bones. This is the part of the process that calls upon creativity and imagination the most.

The ideal result is a description of the future end state, a detailed picture of what that world looks like and feels like—along with a story explaining how it came into being (i.e., the developments taking place over the next 10 years that lead to that end state). It should explain what that end state is like from the perspective of different stakeholders, too.

Very often, scenario planning groups are able to come up with a fictional chronology of events or milestones (e.g., “In 2019, we noticed for the first time that there were more foreign students than Americans in the freshman intake”), but what is more important is to describe the chain of causality. What should emerge from this important phase of the scenario planning process should be more than a canned timeline of the next 10 years; it should be a more in-depth “history” of the next 10 years—a logical, step-by-step reasoning of the intermediate causes and effects that resulted, in 10 years, in that particular end state coming into being.
7. Validating The Scenarios And Identifying Further Research Needed 
After all the creative juices have flowed and the scenarios have been drafted, but before they have been made official or have been widely distributed, they should be thoroughly vetted by knowledgeable outsiders to the process. Ideally, you will present the scenarios to a selection of stakeholders and other individuals with relevant experience or expertise and ask for their feedback: 
Are the scenarios plausible? 
Are they clear? Are they relevant? 
Do they seem internally consistent? 
What’s missing? 
What changes should be made?

8. Assessing Their Implications And Defining Possible Responses 
There are several ways to do this. The critical thing to accomplish, though, is to develop a catalog of possible strategic options for each of the scenarios. 
If the future really turns out to look like this, how would the group want the company to react?

9. Identifying Signposts 
The scenarios you’ve created each define a world that could exist 10 years from now, or even more. The four scenarios (i.e., the four “worlds” you’ve described) are each different, yet they’ve all been vetted, and everyone involved in the process is in agreement that from today’s vantage point, they are all plausible. That doesn’t mean that everyone believes each scenario has a 25 percent probability of emerging. But possible. 
This implies that from today’s starting point, developments could take you in any one of the four directions defined. For the moment, you simply don’t know which of those directions it will be. So, an important question is, when will you know? A year from now, many things will already be different. Based on the changes over the previous 12 months, will it be possible to see more clearly that one of the scenarios is emerging rather than the other three? If not, how about in three years? Or five? 
Surely there comes a point where the fog lifts and it becomes clear where we’re heading. Of course, the answer to this question is that the future doesn’t reveal itself according to a timetable. Instead, it can only be read (to the extent it can be read at all) by noticing the events and changes that take place along the way. That is what you have to be able to do: Read the signs.

4. 
ILL-DEFINED PROBLEMS


Tools for exploring ill-defined problems
Problem Types
Ill-Defined Problems
Goal is to find problems worth solving by asking what’s the next big thing inherent in a situation

What is plausible for us to begin working on now that will create new opportunities (products and markets) for us in the near and medium terms?

Examples:
What is the next big thing for AI in our industry?
What is the next big thing for online learning?
What is the next big thing for smart watches?
What is the next big thing for the travel industry?
What is the next big thing for Google?
What is the next big thing in city services?

We explore ill-defined problems either
By themselves, or
As a result of exploring un-defined problems
Example: What’s Next Big Thing for Electric Vehicles?
The question is not “What is the future of electric vehicles?”
But how to take advantage of changes in:
Personal mobility
Supply chains
Vehicle types
Business models
Example: Baltimore Harbor
A visit to Baltimore Harbor revealed lots of pollution

If the problem were un-defined:  What is the future of Baltimore Harbor?
Framing an Ill-Defined Problem
This is not a problem that can be solved because it is unclear what exactly you are cleaning up, and how.

It should be noted that the terms well-defined and ill-defined are not evaluative when applied to problem situations; that is, a well-defined problem is not in any way a better problem than an ill-defined one, nor is it necessarily easier to solve. 
Rather, well- and ill-defined are descriptive terms, which simply tell you how much information you are given before you begin to solve the problem. 
Ill-defined problems require that the problem solver specify some missing elements before solution can occur.
The Process for Creating an Ill-Defined Problem
Start with the domain of interest – How can we clean up pollution in waterways?
Constrain the problem by identifying the missing elements:
What kind of pollution?
Sewage
Domestic effluents
Industrial effluents
Oil
Agricultural runoff
Trash
What kind of waterway?
Ocean
Inland
Create an ill-defined problem: How can we clean up trash from inland waterways?
Create a list of opportunities

The Solution
Take one opportunity and turn it into a well-defined problem: How can we continuously clean up trash from inland waterways with minimal human intervention and oversight?

Answer: a robot that uses computer vision and AI that picks up floating trash with minimal human intervention (a Roomba for the harbor).
The PixieDrone
FUNCTION
PixieDrone is a floating waste collector drone. Controlled by remote control, it allows you to intervene quickly on identified waste collection areas

STRONG POINTS
PixieDrone is equipped with a video camera and LIDAR technology to avoid obstacles. Start your drone and follow its activity from the WebApp. It has a collection capacity of 160 liters and offers up to 6 hours of operation in autonomous mode. It works equally well in salt water, fresh water and brackish water.

TARGETS
Floating waste in all its forms: organic, plastic, glass, metal, paper, fabric, rubber, etc…

Summary: Using Ill-Defined Problems
How can you find a problem worth solving?
By exploring a space and finding the opportunities that are inherent in the situation
Some of which can then be turned into well-defined problems that can actually be solved.

Addresses questions such as
What’s next?
What’s missing in the marketplace?
How do we pivot?
How do we disrupt our business before competitors do?
Examples:
Technology:  What big problems can blockchain address?
User Experience:  How can the doctor/patient experience be improved?
Industry space:  What’s next for smartwatches?
Tools for Exploring Ill-Defined Problems
Extensive searching – broad survey over many domains looking for connections, patterns, and random intersections that may prove valuable
Intensive searching – deep dive into a single domain, researching and exploring that domain intensively
EXTENSIVE SEARCHING:
THE MEDICI EFFECT
FRANS JOHANSSON
(HARVARD BUSINESS PRESS: 2006)
Two Kinds of Innovation
The major difference between a directional idea and an intersectional one is that we know where we are going with the former. 
Directional innovation improves a product in fairly predictable steps, along a well-defined dimension…. The goal is to evolve an established idea by using refinements and adjustments. The rewards for doing so are reasonably predictable and attained relatively quickly.
Intersectional innovations, on the other hand, change the world in leaps along new directions. They usually pave the way for a new field and therefore make it possible for the people who originated them to become the leaders in the fields they created. Intersectional innovations also do not require as much expertise as directional innovation and can therefore be executed by the people you least suspect.

Intersectional Ideas
…what we are really saying is that the people in the program have managed to connect these fields, and through these connections the have come up with new creative insights.
The term field is used in this book to describe disciplines, cultures, and domains in which one can specialize through education, work, hobbies, traditions, or other life experiences…. Fields consist of concepts such as knowledge and practices…. In order to understand a field, one has to understand at least some of its concepts.
The key difference between a field and an intersection of fields lies in how concepts within them are combined. If you operate within a field, you primarily are able to combine concepts within that particular field, generating ideas that evolve along a particular direction – what I call directional ideas. When you step into the Intersection, you combine concepts between multiple fields, generating ideas that leap in new directions – what I call intersectional ideas.
Characteristics
Intersectional innovations share the following characteristics:
They are surprising, unusual, non-obvious, and fascinating.
The take leaps in new directions.
They open up entirely new fields.
They provide a space for a person, team, or company to call its own.
They generate followers, which means the creators can become leaders.
They provide a source of directional innovation for years or decades to come.
They can affect the world in unprecedented ways.

There are three distinct forces behind the rise of intersections, and at this moment, perhaps for the first time, they are all working together.
The movement of people
The convergence of science
The leap of computation
Example: Celcy
Two Baltimore natives and Johns Hopkins graduates have created a smart appliance system to make it easier for families and working professionals to have a home-prepared meal without having to cook it themselves.
Celcy stores frozen meals on one side of the appliance, moves them to its oven side when they’re ready to be prepared, cooks the meals, and tracks users’ preferences to offer suggestions.
Users can schedule meals at a particular time and, using a mobile app, direct Celcy to unpack and cook meals.

Associations and Associative Barriers
…the mind unravels a chain of associations. By simply hearing a word or seeing an image, the mind unlocks a whole string of associated ideas, each one connecting to another. These chains tend to be clustered around domains related to our own experience… Chains of association are efficient; they allow us to move quickly from analysis to action. Although chains of association have huge benefits, they also carry costs. They inhibit our ability to think broadly.
In the search for intersections, low barriers provide an advantage. The problem is that there are strong benefits to keeping our natural cognitive barriers in place. Our brain evolved the way it did for a reason. It generally enjoys finding order in things, grouping concepts together, and finding structure in the environment surrounding it. A person with high associative barriers will quickly arrive at conclusions when confronted with a problem sine their thinking is more focused. He or she will recall how the problem has been handled in the past, or how others in similar situations solved it.
A person with low associative barriers, on the other hand, may think to connect ideas or concepts that have very little basis in past experience, or that can be traced logically.
How to Make Barriers Fall
People succeed at breaking down their associative barriers because they did one or more of the following things:
Exposed themselves to a range of cultures
Learned differently
Reversed their assumptions
Took on multiple perspectives
People step into the Intersection by generating lots of random combinations. How? By
diversifying occupations,
expanding networks and interacting with diverse groups of people, and 
going Intersection Hunting by searching for connections in unlikely places and then seeing where those connections lead.

The Process
Start with something of importance to you
Put it together with a wide range of unrelated ideas or products or services
What surprising, unusual, non-obvious, and fascinating (intersectional) ideas result from the combination?
Where are the opportunities?

Alternatively: Who could you talk to (from an unrelated field) that could give you a different perspective on your field?
INTENSIVE SEARCHING: THE FOUR LENSES OF INNOVATION
Rowan Gibson
 (John Wiley & Sons: 2015)
Two Constants
If we strip the whole creative process down to its absolute basics, however, we find that there are in fact only two constants: two elements that can never be skipped and that always occur in exactly the same order. In fact, these two critical elements are indispensable to every single innovation story in the world: 
One element is the big idea. Obviously, at the heart of every significant innovation there is a compelling and value-creating idea of some kind—a new combination of thoughts. 
The other element is the illuminating insight (or insights). Without fail, every big idea was preceded by at least one insight—a new and penetrating understanding into a situation or problem. 
These two elements of the creative thinking process—the insight and the idea—are invariably present in each case, and are always inextricably connected. Why? Because if there was one universal law of innovation, it would be this: Powerful new ideas are never simply snatched out of the air. They are always inspired by insights.
Four Lenses: The Sources of Insights
As we have learned so far, there were four particular perspectives or patterns of thinking that became prevalent in the Renaissance period:    
Harnessing Trends:  Recognizing the future potential of emerging developments, and using these trends to open up new opportunities   
Understanding Needs:  Paying attention to issues and frustrations others have ignored, and experimenting with new solutions to problems
Challenging Orthodoxies:  Questioning deeply entrenched beliefs and assumptions (i.e. received wisdom), and exploring new and highly unconventional answers   
Leveraging Resources:  Understanding our limitless capacity for redeploying skills and assets in new ways, combinations, or contexts   
HARNESSING TRENDS


What opportunities can be found by EXPLOITING CHANGES?
Example: Amazon
Example: Blockbuster
Four Types of Macro Changes
In general, four types of changes make opportunities for new businesses: changes in technology, changes in political and regulatory rules, changes in social and demographic factors, and changes in industry structure:
…technological change allows people to do things that could not be done before or only could be done in a less efficient manner…. The magnitude of the technological change is important. The larger the technological change, the greater the opportunity for new businesses to be created because larger magnitude changes affect more uses for technology, allowing the use of new technology in more things. 
Why do political and regulatory changes enhance entrepreneurial opportunity? Deregulation creates opportunity because it allows more variance in ideas to be put forward by entrepreneurs who might have been barred from entry under a regulated regime. 
Social and demographic changes open up opportunities for new technology businesses by altering people's preferences and creating demand for things where demand had not existed before. 
Sometimes, industry structure shifts because firms that supply other firms or major customers die or because firms merge or acquire each other. These types of shifts change the competitive dynamics in an industry and open up or close down niches that may provide opportunities for entrepreneurs. 
Examples
From Charles Kirschbaum (Insper):
Growing demand for eco-friendly products
The health and wellness industry is experiencing significant growth, driven by factors such as an aging population
The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the adoption of remote work and many employees do not want to return to face-to-face work
Consumers increasingly seek personalized experiences and products
Growing demand for businesses that prioritize social and environmental impact
Four Great Disruptive Forces
Speed, surprise, and sudden shifts in direction in huge global markets routinely impact the destinies of established companies and provide opportunities for new entrants. 
In fact, ours is a world of near-constant discontinuity. Competitors can rise in almost complete stealth and burst upon the scene. Businesses that were protected by large and deep moats find that their defenses are easily breached. Vast new markets are conjured seemingly from nothing. Technology and globalization have accelerated and intensified the natural forces of market competition
A radically different world is forming. The operating system of the world’s economy is being rewritten as we speak. It doesn’t come out in a splashy new release. It evolves, unfolds, and often explodes. 
The Four great disruptive forces:
The shifting locus of economic activity
The impact of technology
Demographics
Flows and Connectivity
The Metaverse
…the metaverse is a combinatorial technology: it combines elements of many of the top trends that the McKinsey Technology Council identified this year as most promising, including 
AI, 
immersive reality, 
advanced connectivity, and 
Web3. 

For now, to get a sense of the potential, consider two of the largest and more advanced uses, one for consumer businesses and one for B2B companies:
Brand marketing and consumer engagement. Many companies have already added the metaverse to their omnichannel marketing mix, staking out a presence in virtual worlds like Roblox, Fortnite, and the Sandbox. 
Digital twins. In the metaverse, every asset, process, or person within and related to an enterprise can be replicated virtually—and connected. As a result, nearly every aspect of work can take place digitally before it does so physically. By building digital twins—virtual replicas of physical settings and objects in a metaverse that generate data in real time—far richer analyses can be generated to enable improved decision making.

Google Trends
http://www.google.com/trends/topcharts?date=2013 

Bloomberg: Four Trends
Four trends are set to shape the world in the decades ahead: 
energy cost differentials, 
rising wages in China, 
nearshoring supply chains, and 
remote work. 
For emerging countries with the right natural resources and institutions, that means an opportunity to accelerate up the income ladder. 
McKinsey Technology Trends Outlook 2022
The Next Normal
What is being Enhanced? Or Destroyed?
TECHNOLOGICAL AND SCIENTIFIC CHANGES
The Technology Complex
A suitable general and inclusive definition of technology becomes the ‘knowledge of how to organize people and tools to achieve specific ends’. 
The elements within the technology complex have been ordered to range from the physical and artifactual to the social and the cultural. This captures the idea that there are multiple ‘levels’ within society at which people organize  artifacts to create working technologies. Any or all of these elements be analyzed in a working technology – a technology ‘in use’. 

The technology complex:
Material
Energy source
Artifacts/hardware
Layout
Procedures (programs, software)
Knowledge/skills/qualified people
Work organization
Management techniques
Organizational structure
Cost/capital
Industry structure (suppliers, users, promoters)
Location
Social relations
Culture
Technological Transitions
Successful technological entrepreneurship requires a focus on technological transitions. This focus on technological transitions is important because, most of the time, entrepreneurs target the wrong type of technological change to establish their new businesses. They start their businesses to exploit incremental change. By focusing on incremental change, entrepreneurs often find that they cannot compete with established firms and fail. 
What successful technology entrepreneurs have come to realize is that, to be successful, new ventures need to target technological transitions, points when an industry is shifting from one basic technology to another, such as when the printing industry shifted from hot lead linotype machines to cold off-set printing generated by computers. 
Your new venture will be greatly advantaged by focusing on technological transitions because they undermine the advantages of established firms. The reluctance of established firms to embrace these transitions will allow you to enter an industry and use the new technology to develop a business that is based on what may ultimately becomes a better technology than that belonging to the established firm.
Diminishing Returns
New technology tends to develop in an evolutionary manner…. The incremental advances that occur within a technological framework and the radical shifts between technology frameworks can be presented graphically using a concept called the S-curve. Developed by Richard Foster, a McKinsey consultant, the S-curve shows the performance of a technology as a function of the amount of effort expended to develop it. 
Ultimately, all technologies reach diminishing returns, making it difficult for managers to achieve very marked performance improvement in their technologies. At these points when technologies are facing these diminishing returns, new firms can often successfully enter industries with new technologies. 

In general, the conditions that exist before a dominant design emerges are more favorable to new firms than conditions that exist after a dominant design emerges. Before a dominant design emerges, barriers to entry are low, facilitating firm formation at a lower cost, and therefore a lower risk. Markets are also fragmented, with many small competitors.
Technology S-Curves
Both the rate of a technology’s performance improvement and the rate at which technology is adopted in the marketplace have repeatedly been shown to conform to an S-curve 
The S-curve model suggests that technological change is cyclical
Each new S-curve ushers in an initial period of turbulence, followed by rapid improvement, then diminishing returns, and ultimately is displaced by a new technological discontinuity
Emergence of a new technological discontinuity can overturn the existing competitive structure of an industry, creating new leaders and new losers
An Evolutionary Process
Technological change can be fruitfully characterized as a sociocultural evolutionary process of variation, selection, and retention. Variation is driven by stochastic technological breakthroughs. Technological discontinuities initiate substantial technological rivalry between alternative technological regimes. Social, political, and organizational dynamics select single industry standards or dominant designs from among technological opportunities. Positively selected variants then evolve through relatively long retention periods, marked by incremental technical change and increased interdependence and enhanced competence within and between the communities of practitioners. 
Technological advance may, then, be driven by the combination of chance or random events (variation), the direct social, political action of individuals and organizations in selecting between rival industry standards (selection), and the incremental, competence-enhancing, puzzle-solving actions of many organizations that are learning by doing (retention). 

Technological Discontinuities and Dominant Design
Tushman and Anderson (1986) highlighted a powerful source of variation by demonstrating that the core technology of an industry evolves through long periods of incremental change punctuated by technological discontinuities. This paper extends that work by exploring the other key punctuating event in the evolution of a technology: the emergence of a dominant design after a technological discontinuity. 
We argue that a breakthrough innovation inaugurates an era of ferment in which competition among variations of the original breakthrough culminates in the selection of a single dominant configuration of the new technology. Successful variations are preserved by the incremental evolution of this standard architecture until a new discontinuous advance initiates a new cycle of variation, selection, and retention. The key punctuation points are technological discontinuities and dominant designs; these delimit eras of ferment and eras of incremental change. 
At rare and irregular intervals in every industry, innovations appear that "command a decisive cost or quality advantage and that strike not at the margins of the profits and the outputs of the existing firms, but at their foundations and their very lives" (Schumpeter, 1942: 84). Such innovations depart dramatically from the norm of continuous incremental innovation that characterizes product classes, and they may be termed technological discontinuities. These discontinuities either affect underlying processes or the products themselves. 

Macro and Micro-Inventions
Does technology not simply accumulate continuously from the incremental, almost imperceptible changes brought about by a large number of anonymous people – invisible, small incremental improvements?
Modern research has shown that most cost savings are achieved through small, invisible, cumulative improvements.  But improvements in what?
Therefore there are two kinds of technological changes:
Micro-mutations which gradually alter the features of a species, and 
Macro-mutations which create a new species
Micro-inventions 
Small, incremental steps which improve, adapt, and streamline existing techniques already in use, reducing costs, improving form and function, increasing durability and reducing raw material and energy requirements
Macro-inventions
Inventions in which a radical new idea, without clear precedent, emerges
Macro-inventions and micro-inventions are not substitutes but complements
But without novel and radical departures, the continuous process of improving and refining existing techniques would run into diminishing returns and eventually peter out

Dominant Design
Class Exercise
Where is a technology reaching its physical or market limit?
Where is there a dominant design (technological or non-technological) that is falling apart?
Where is there a dominant design that should/could fall apart?
Where are the discontinuities?
Where are the opportunities?  Where are the next big problems worth solving?
EXAMPLE: ANDY GROVE AND STRATEGIC INFLECTION POINTS
http://www.intel.com/pressroom/archive/speeches/ag080998.htm

Vertical Computer Industry – Circa 1980
Horizontal Computer Industry – Circa 1995
How to tell a Strategic Inflection Point
Let's start with Strategic Inflection Points. They represent, in my description of it, what happens to a business when a major change takes place in its competitive environment. A major change due to introduction of new technologies. A major change due to the introduction of a different regulatory environment. The major change can be simply a change in the customers' values, a change in what customers prefer. Almost always it hits the corporation in such a way that those of us in senior management are among the last ones to notice.
The biggest difficulty with Strategic Inflection Points is telling one from the many changes that impinge on you in the business. 
How do you know if a change is just a garden variety change or qualified to be this monumental, catastrophic change category that we call an Inflection Point? 
I could never come up with a particularly satisfactory answer to that question.
Indicators of a Strategic Inflection Point
Has your most dangerous competitor changed?
Do the people you have worked with for years suddenly make no sense?
Are there customers out there rejecting your offering for something else entirely?
Are customers paying attention to new technologies that you are ignoring?
Is there a growing divergence between what important competitors are saying and doing?
Is there a growing divergence between what the corporate data systems are saying and what your people are saying, especially those working with customers?
Are lower level people not bringing you any news anymore, i.e. they are afraid to be the bearers of bad news?
The Christensen thesis: is there a new approach or technology out there that is capturing market share, especially in niches where you no longer compete?

Some Key Warning Signs
Some key warning signs that hint that the change you are dealing with make a Strategic Inflection Point is when it is clear to you that all of a sudden the company or the entity that you worry about has shifted. 
You have dealt with one particular company or establishment as a competitor all your life and all of a sudden you don't care about them, you care about what somebody else thinks. I have this mental silver bullet test. 
If you had one bullet, who would you shoot with it? If you change the direction of the gun, that is one of the signals that you may be dealing with something more than an ordinary shift in the competitive landscape.
Likewise, is your key complement a company whose work you rely on to make your company more available? 
And lastly, when people seem to be talking gibberish around you, people who you worked with for 20 years, who you have a lot of respect for, who normally nobody is talking about and then suddenly everybody seems to talk about them. It's time to sit up and listen and to see what's going on.

You Will Never Find It in the Data
There are a variety of tools to use to identify a Strategic Inflection Point. These are empirical observations. 
One of the empirical observations with companies that are dealing with Strategic Inflection Points, or are in the middle of them, is that there is a growing divergence, a dissonance if you will, between the strategy statements of those companies and the strategy actions. Which of those two adapts to the new realities first? It is strategic actions. Because strategic actions are driven by the competition, driven by the sales force, driven by the sheer necessity of winning business in the marketplace day in and day out. It is a long way before the collection of those strategy actions ends up into the reformulation of what the corporation says it is about.
We have a phrase inside Intel. We are supposed to be a data driven company and the phrase is, "Don't argue with the emotions, argue with the data." 
And I'm going to say you have to argue with the data at times like this because the data that deal with your business are pertinent to your past, and don't say anything about your future. And the Strategic Inflection Point is a minor activity at present growing in the future and you will never find it in data.
The People Who Bring You the Bad News
In the system that I described to you, these people tend to be lower level people. They have to bring you bad news and be Cassandras against the senior management, against the fear of management of repercussions. Unless you deal with this fear, unless you live this fear you will never hear from those helpful Cassandras and you are going to be late in responding to the Strategic Inflection Points.
Although they can come from anywhere in the company, Cassandras are usually in middle management. Often they work in the sales organization. They usually know more about upcoming change than the senior management because they spend so much time “outdoors” where the winds of the real world below in their faces.
The most important tool in identifying a particular development as a strategic inflection point is a broad and intensive debate. How will it affect our business if we make a dramatic move? How will it affect it if we don’t?
The Solution is Experimentation
Resolution of strategic dissonance comes through experimentation. The level of control in the organization must be loosened. People must try different techniques, review different products, exploit different sales channels and go after different customers. Much as management may like to make and keep order in the company, at times like this they must become more tolerant of the new and the different. Only stepping out of the old runs will bring new insights.
The dilemma is that we can not suddenly start experimenting when we realize we are in trouble unless we have been experimenting all along. It’s too late to do it once things have changed in our core business.
Taking an organization through a strategic inflection point is a march through unknown territory. The rules of business are still not clear. People lack a mental map of the new environment, and even the shape of the desired goal is not completely clear.
The Key is Culture
An organization that has a culture that can deal with these two phases – debate (chaos reigns) and a determined march (chaos reined in) – is a powerful, adaptive organization. 
Such an organization has two attributes:
It tolerates and even encourages debates. These debates are vigorous, devoted to exploring issues, indifferent to rank and include individuals of varied backgrounds.
It is capable of making and accepting clear decisions, with the entire organization then supporting the decision.
Organizations that have these characteristics are far more ready to deal with a strategic-inflect ionpoint than others. 
The other side of the valley of death represents a new industry order that is hard to visualize before the transition. Getting through the strategic inflection point means going through a period of confusion, experimentation and chaos, followed by a period of single-minded determination to pursue a new direction toward an initially nebulous goal.
WHAT ARE THE IMPLICATIONS OF CHANGES?
Where are the discontinuities and the opportunities for innovation?
Futures Wheel: Thinking through the Implications
First, second, and third order consequences of changes:
Example: Budget Cut
Example: Waste Management
Can include
Time spans
PEST categories
Flow of consequences
Example: COVID

A Better Idea: What are the Consequences of Widescale Automobile Adoption?
Systems Diagram: Mapping the Consequences of Widescale Automobile Adoption
The Process
Choose a domain and macro-trend of interest to you
Identify relevant PEST categories and construct a systems diagram
What is changing within each category?  
What is being destroyed?  
What dominant designs are breaking down?
Where are the discontinuities?  What are the first, second, and third order consequences within each category?
What are the next big problems worth solving?  Where are the opportunities to build on (replace?) what is being destroyed?
Examples
Changes out there:
An aging population
The retreat of liberal democracy
Media
Education
Marriage
Trust in government
Climate change
Technologies
mRNA vaccines
AI and medicine
Blockchain and medicine
Sustainable consumption
Big data and medicine
Extended reality
Your choice???
Exercise: Ill-Defined (macro-changes)
Cover slide
Choose a domain of interest to you
What are some of the key macro trends and changes impacting that domain:
Political, economic, social, technological
Environmental 
Demographic
Business and industry structure
Show your research
Select relevant PEST categories and construct a Systems Diagram:
What is changing?  What is being destroyed?  
What dominant designs are breaking down?
Where are the discontinuities?
What are the first, second, and third order consequences within each category?
What are the opportunities?  Where are the next big problems worth solving?
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (maximum 3), not the solution.

UNDERSTANDING NEEDS


WHAT opportunities can be found by rethinking the USER EXPERIENCE?
Example: Warby Parker
Warby Parker was founded with a mission: to inspire and impact the world with vision, purpose, and style.
We're constantly asking ourselves how we can do more and make a greater impact—and that starts by reimagining everything that a company and industry can be. We want to demonstrate that a business can scale, be profitable, and do good in the world—without charging a premium for it. And we've learned that it takes creativity, empathy, and innovation to achieve that goal.
Every idea starts with a problem. Ours was simple: Glasses are too expensive.
Our founders were students when one of them lost his glasses on a backpacking trip. The cost of replacing them was so high that he spent the first semester of grad school without them, squinting and complaining. (We don't recommend this.)

Example: Casper
We believe sleep is the superpower that charges everything people do.
We’ve spent years studying the magic and science of sleep. The more we learn, the more we’re sure: Great sleep changes everything. It makes us friendlier, faster, smarter... even warmer-and-fuzzier. If we all got great sleep, the world would be brighter.
So we dreamed a big dream. We started by creating an outrageously comfortable mattress and shipping it to your door in a tiny box. Now, over one million sleepers later, our mission has only grown...

Example: Improving the User Burrito Experience
"First, we learned about the science around tape and different adhesives, and then we worked to find edible counterparts," said Tyler Guarino, who teamed up with fellow engineering seniors Marie Eric, Rachel Nie, and Erin Walsh on the project.
The team tested a "multitude" of ingredients and combinations before settling on a final recipe, which is edible, safe, and has the tensile strength you can trust to hold together a fat burrito.
Because they are applying for a patent, team members declined to disclose their secret formula.
"What I can say is that all its ingredients are safe to consume, are food grade, and are common food and dietary additives," Guarino said.
Months spent prototyping resulted in rectangular strips measuring half an inch by two inches. These come affixed to sheets of waxed paper. To use, simply remove a strip from the sheet, wet thoroughly to activate, and apply to your lunch, dinner, or favorite snack. The team members put their invention to the test on "too many burritos to count," but are confident in the quality of their product.
"Tastee Tape allows you to put full faith in your tortilla, and enjoy your meal, mess-free," Guarino said.

Process Mapping
The Advantage of Process Maps
From a process map, consider:
How measuring the steps could help make them better, faster, more efficient
Combining steps
Eliminating steps
New tools and processes

Example: How would you brew a cup of coffee?
Where are the next big problems worth solving?
Opportunity: Stagg EKG Electric Kettle
The Process
Choose a domain of interest to you (preferably one that you know well and others may not)
Identify an important process or user experience in that domain
Create a process map
Rate each step according to importance and satisfaction (i.e. how well it is being satisfied or addressed)
Focus on the steps with high importance and low satisfaction
What is preventing the step from being addressed well?
Where are the opportunities?
Exercise: Ill-Defined (user experiences)
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – choose an ill-defined problem of interest to you. 
What are the important user experiences?
Include your process map and rate each step according to importance and satisfaction
Where are the opportunities?  Where is the next big problem to solve (maximum 3)?
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (opportunities), not the solution.  Think in terms of uses cases:
What is the problem? 
Who has the problem? 
Why do they have the problem? 
JOBS-TO-BE-DONE


Example: What is the Job to be Done Here?
Example: Or Here?
Example: Or Here?
COMPETING AGAINST LUCK


CLAYTON CHRISTENSEN, et. al.
(HARPER COLLINS: 2016)
The Signals of Change
When can we reasonably expect innovation to lead to the emergence of new companies or business models that could be harbingers of industry change?

The answer involves evaluating three customer groups:
Customers not consuming any product or consuming only in inconvenient settings (non-consumers)
Consuming customers who are undershot
Consuming customers who are overshot

Identifying the industry circumstance is important because it defines what sorts of innovations will not flourish

Sustaining or Disruptive?
The Data Never Tells You Why
Here is the fundamental problem: the masses and masses of data that companies accumulate are not organized in a way that enables them to reliably predict which ideas will succeed. 
Instead the data is along the lines of “this customer looks like that one,” “this product has similar performance attributes as that one,” and “these people behaved the same way in the past,” or “68 percent of customers say they prefer version A over version B.” 
None of that data, however, actually tells you why customers make the choices that they do.
If a company doesn’t understand why I might choose to “hire” its product in certain circumstances — and why I might choose something else in others — its data about me or people like me is unlikely to help it create any new innovations for me. It’s seductive to believe that we can see important patterns and cross-references in our data sets, but that doesn’t mean one thing actually caused the other. 
Theory of Jobs To Be Done
The foundation of our thinking is the Theory of Jobs to Be Done, which focuses on deeply understanding your customers’ struggle for progress and then creating the right solution and attendant set of experiences to ensure you solve your customers’ jobs well, every time. 

“Theory” may conjure up images of ivory tower musings, but I assure you that it is the most practical and useful business tool we can offer you. Good theory helps us understand “how” and “why.” It helps us make sense of how the world works and predict the consequences of our decisions and our actions. Jobs Theory, we believe, can move companies beyond hoping that correlation is enough to the causal mechanism of successful innovation. 
Innovation may never be a perfect science, but that’s not the point. We have the ability to make innovation a reliable engine for growth, an engine based on a clear understanding of causality, rather than simply casting seeds in the hopes of one day harvesting some fruit. 
What is a Job?
A job is the progress that an individual seeks in a given circumstance. 
Successful innovations enable a customer’s desired progress, resolve struggles, and fulfill unmet aspirations. They perform jobs that formerly had only inadequate or nonexistent solutions. 
Jobs are never simply about the functional — they have important social and emotional dimensions, which can be even more powerful than functional ones. 
Because jobs occur in the flow of daily life, the circumstance is central to their definition and becomes the essential unit of innovation work — not customer characteristics, product attributes, new technology, or trends. 
Jobs to Be Done are ongoing and recurring. They’re seldom discrete “events.”
We Don’t Create Jobs, We Discover Them
It’s important to note that we don’t “create” jobs, we discover them. Jobs themselves are enduring and persistent, but the way we solve them can change dramatically over time. Think, for example, of the job of sharing information across long distances. That underlying job has not changed, but our solutions for it have: from Pony Express to telegraph to air mail to email and so on. 
Our understanding of the Job to Be Done can always get better. Adopting new technologies can improve the way we solve Jobs to Be Done. But what’s important is that you focus on understanding the underlying job, not falling in love with your solution for it. 
For innovators, understanding the job is to understand what consumers care most about in that moment of trying to make progress. Jobs Theory enables innovators to make the myriad, detailed tradeoffs in terms of which benefits are essential and which are extraneous to a new offering. Understanding the circumstance-specific hiring criteria triggers a whole series of important insights, perhaps most notably that the competitive field is likely completely different from what you might have imagined. 

NOTE: Jobs Theory is not useful if there is no real struggle for a consumer or the existing solutions are good enough. It’s not useful when the decision to be made relies almost entirely on a mathematical analysis, such as commodities trading. Cost or efficiency is not a core element of a job. In those circumstances, there is not a complex bundle of social, emotional, and functional needs in search of progress. There are rational decisions to be made— and ones that can just as easily be made by a computer. 

Seeing the Job
In practice, seeing a job clearly and fully characterizing it can be tricky. Jobs insights are fragile — they’re more like stories than statistics. When we deconstruct coherent customer episodes into binary bits, such as “male/ female,” “large company/ small company,” “new customer/ existing customer,” we destroy meaning in the process. 
Jobs Theory doesn’t care whether a customer is between the ages of forty and forty-five and what flavor choice they made that day. Jobs Theory is not primarily focused on “who” did something, or “what” they did— but on “why.” 
Understanding jobs is about clustering insights into a coherent picture, rather than segmenting down to finer and finer slices. 
… it’s important to emphasize that a well-defined job is multilayered and complex. And that is actually a good thing. Why? Because it means that perfectly satisfying someone’s job likely requires not just creating a product, but engineering and delivering a whole set of experiences that address the many dimensions of the job and then integrating those experiences into the company’s processes.
Finding Jobs to be Done
There are many ways to develop a deep understanding of the job, including traditional market research techniques. While it’s helpful to develop a “job hunting” strategy, what matters most is not the specific techniques you use, but the questions you ask in applying them and how you piece the resulting information together. 
A valuable source of jobs insights is your own life. Our lives are very articulate and our own experiences offer fertile ground for uncovering Jobs to Be Done. Some of the most successful innovations in history have derived from the experiences and introspection of individuals. 
While most companies spend the bulk of their market research efforts trying to better understand their current customers, important insights about jobs can often be gathered by studying people who are not buying your products — or anyone else’s — a group we call nonconsumers. 
If you observe people employing a workaround or “compensating behavior” to get a job done, pay close attention. It’s usually a clue that you have stumbled on to a high-potential innovation opportunity, because the job is so important and they are so frustrated that they are literally inventing their own solution. 
Closely studying how customers use your products often yields important insights into the jobs, especially if they are using them in unusual and unexpected ways. 
Most companies focus disproportionately on the functional dimensions of their customers’ jobs; but you should pay equally close attention to uncovering the emotional and social dimensions, as addressing all three dimensions is critical to your solution nailing the job. 

Hiring a Job
…most data only tracks one of the two important moments in a customer’s decision to hire a product or service. The most commonly tracked is what we call the “Big Hire” — the moment you buy the product. But there’s an equally important moment that doesn’t show up in most sales data: when you actually “consume” it. 
The moment a consumer brings a purchase into his or her home or business, that product is still waiting to be hired again — we call this the “Little Hire.” If a product really solves the job, there will be many moments of consumption. It will be hired again and again. But too often the data companies gather reflects only the Big Hire, not whether it meets customers’ Jobs to Be Done in reality. 
The Storyboard
Deeply understanding a customer’s real Job to Be Done can be challenging in practice. Customers are often unable to articulate what they want; even when they do describe what they want, their actions often tell a completely different story. 
Seemingly objective data about customer behavior is often misleading, as it focuses exclusively on the Big Hire (when the customer actually buys a product) and neglects the Little Hire (when the customer actually uses it). The Big Hire might suggest that a product has solved a customer’s job, but only a consistent series of Little Hires can confirm it. 
Before a customer hires any new product, you have to understand what he’ll need to fire in order to hire yours. Companies don’t think about this enough. Something always needs to get fired. 
Hearing what a customer can’t say requires careful observation of and interactions with customers, all carried out while maintaining a “beginner’s mind.” This mindset helps you to avoid ingoing assumptions that could prematurely filter out critical information. 
Developing a full understanding of the job can be done by assembling a kind of storyboard that describes in rich detail the customer’s circumstances, moments of struggle, imperfect experiences, and corresponding frustrations. 
As part of your storyboard, it’s critically important to understand the forces that compel change to a new solution, including the “push” of the unsatisfied job itself and the “pull” of the new solution. 
It is also critical to understand the forces opposing any change, including the inertia caused by current habits and the anxiety about the new. 
If the forces opposing change are strong, you can often innovate the experiences you provide in a way that mitigates them, for example by creating experiences that minimize the anxiety of moving to something new. 
The iPad: Escaping Presentism
Apple co-founder Steve Jobs stated in a 1983 speech that his company’s
“Strategy is really simple. What we want to do at Apple, is we want to put an incredibly great computer in a book that you can carry around with you and learn how to use in 20 minutes ... And we really want to do it with a radio link in it so you don’t have to hook up to anything and you’re in communication with all of these larger databases and other computers.”
Apple’s first tablet computer was the Newton Message Pad 100 introduced in 1993…. Apple released several more Newton-based PDAs; the final one, the MessagePad 2100, was discontinued in 1998.
Apple reentered the mobile-computing market in 2007 with the iPhone. Smaller than the (not yet announced) iPad and featuring a camera and mobile phone, it pioneered the multitouch finger-sensitive touchscreen interface of Apple’s iOS mobile operating system.
By late 2009, the iPad's release had been rumored for several years. Such speculation mostly talked about “Apple’s tablet….” The actual name is reportedly an homage to the Star Trek PADD, a fictional device very similar in appearance to the iPad. The iPad was announced on January 27, 2010, by Jobs at an Apple press conference….
Jobs later said that Apple began developing the iPad before the iPhone….

Summary: Where are the Opportunities?
Jobs-to-be-done are ill-defined problems.  
What are the opportunities that would 
allow people to do a job better or cheaper or more conveniently,
help people eliminate things that keep them from doing a job well, and 
allow people to find a better or cheaper or more convenient way of doing a part of the job (based on a jobs or process analysis)?
Think in terms of products, services, and policies.
Combining Importance and Satisfaction
Combining importance and satisfaction is the key to using job-to-be-done analysis to find problems worth solving.

Key Questions About the Job:
How important is the outcome to you?
How well satisfied is the outcome you want by using the options currently available?
You want to focus on are the things that are important but not well satisfied.
If something is well-satisfied but unimportant, then it is still an opportunity to create a low-cost disruptive offering (innovation).
Example: Why do you fly Southwest?
They always ask about cabin service and on-time performance. 
But the real reasons why we fly Southwest are because we can change the flight for free, multiple flights in a day, no baggage charge.
Exercise
How would Generative AI help you do a better job of…?
Remember:
What are you trying to accomplish, i.e., what specific outcomes are you looking for?
What is preventing you from doing the job you want?

The Process
Choose a domain of interest to you and that you know well
Identify a job to be done in that domain
In other words, what are people trying to accomplish; what progress are they looking to make, i.e., what specific outcomes are they looking for?
What is preventing them from doing the job they want to do?
Use a process map.
Rate the steps in the process according to importance and satisfaction.
Where are the opportunities?
Exercise: Job to be Done
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – choose an ill-defined problem of interest to you.
Identify jobs that need to be done better (include desired outcomes).
Select one
Use process mapping to break the job down into components that can be improved, either maximized or minimized. 
What is preventing this job from being done well? (think in terms of the 80/20 rule)
Identify opportunities (maximum 3) that come from your jobs-to-be-done analysis.
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (opportunities), not the solution. 
Think in terms of uses cases:
What is the problem? 
Who has the problem? 
Why do they have the problem? 
And, would they pay more to solve it better?
CHALLENGING ORTHODOXIES
What opportunities can be found by challenging paradigms in an industry space?
Example: Netflix
Netflix, one of the world’s top streaming entertainment providers, started in 1998 as a company that allowed consumers to rent and buy physical DVD movies. 
The company quickly added a subscription offering in 1999 where people could rent as many DVDs as they wanted, receiving rentals in the mail. 
After seeing enormous success with its physical DVD rentals, executives decided in 2007 to focus on streaming content that could be accessed instantaneously via the internet and to move away from physical media. 
Netflix’s decision to invest in streaming and de-emphasize DVD rentals changed the entire entertainment landscape and today, the company is worth more than $200 billion.
Example: Starbucks
The original Starbucks wasn’t a café. It sold gourmet beans and equipment so customers could make their own coffee. In 1981, a sales rep for one of its suppliers visited to see why four small stores in Seattle were selling more of a simple drip setup than all of Macy’s.
His name was Howard Schultz. Like Ray Kroc, the milkshake machine peddler who saw potential in the McDonald brothers’ burger joint, Schultz thought big. Starbucks could go national, he told the owners, with “dozens of stores, maybe even hundreds,” and become a brand-name “synonymous with great coffee.” In 1982, he joined the company as marketing chief.
Here, Starbucks history gets complicated. Inspired by the coffee bars he saw on a 1983 trip to Milan, Schultz wanted to bring ubiquitous cafés to the U.S. When Starbucks wouldn’t take the idea beyond a test store, he started his own company, called Il Giornale.
The parting was amicable, with the owners of Starbucks investing in his new venture. Within a few years, they were ready to concentrate on other businesses and, in 1987, they sold Starbucks to Schultz.
How Did They Do It?
What corporate (or societal) assumptions were challenged?
Regarding business models (i.e., how the company makes money now)
Regarding technologies?
Regarding user experiences?
What received wisdom did management question?
What dominant designs were challenged?
How did the companies change the terms of competition?
Where were the opportunities?
A MORE BEAUTIFUL QUESTION


Warren Berger
(Bloomsbury: 2014)
Introduction
Artists from Picasso to Chuck Close have spoken of questioning’s inspirational power. (This great quote from Close was featured recently on the site BrainPickings: “Ask yourself an interesting enough question and your attempt to find a tailor-made solution to that question will push you to a place where, pretty soon, you’ll find yourself all by your lonesome— which I think is a more interesting place to be.”) 
The most creative, successful business leaders have tended to be expert questioners. They’re known to question the conventional wisdom of their industry, the fundamental practices of their company, even the validity of their own assumptions. 

Questions challenge authority and disrupt established structures, processes, and systems, forcing people to have to at least think about doing something differently. To encourage or even allow questioning is to cede power— not something that is done lightly in hierarchical companies or in government organizations, or even in classrooms, where a teacher must be willing to give up control to allow for more questioning.
Three Part Model
Just asking Why without taking any action may be a source of stimulating thought or conversation, but it is not likely to produce change. 
Basic formula: Q (questioning) + A (action) = I (innovation). 
On the other hand, Q – A = P (philosophy). 

In observing how questioners tackle problems, I noticed a pattern in many of the stories:   
Person encounters a situation that is less than ideal; asks Why.  
Person begins to come up with ideas for possible improvements / solutions— with such ideas usually surfacing in the form of What If possibilities.  
Person takes one of those possibilities and tries to implement it or make it real; this mostly involves figuring out How. 

Asking Powerful Questions
If “What If” is about imagining and “How” is about doing, the initial “Why” stage has to do with seeing and understanding. 

To ask powerful Why questions, we must:   
Step back.
Notice what others miss.     
Challenge assumptions (including our own).
Gain a deeper understanding of the situation or problem at hand, through contextual inquiry.
Question the questions we’re asking.
Take ownership of a particular question.
While a fairly straightforward process, it begins by moving backward. 

Five Learning Skills
Five learning skills, or “habits of mind,” were at the core …and each was matched up with a corresponding question:   
Evidence: How do we know what’s true or false? What evidence counts?   
Viewpoint: How might this look if we stepped into other shoes, or looked at it from a different direction?   
Connection: Is there a pattern? Have we seen something like this before?   
Conjecture: What if it were different?   
Relevance: Why does this matter? 

 Class Exercise: Asking Questions
Why
do we get our electricity from a central grid?
do we all go to school for 16+ years?
does every house have its own full kitchen?
is your house never large enough for all your guests?
is anything the way it is?
Where are the opportunities?
Class Exercise
Choose an organization or company
What corporate (or societal) assumptions can be challenged?
Regarding business models (i.e., how the company makes money now)
Regarding technologies?
Regarding user experiences?
What received wisdom should management question?
What dominant designs should be challenged?
Where are the opportunities?  Where is the next big problem to solve (maximum 3)?
CHANGING THE TERMS OF COMPETITION
Un-constraining and expanding the search space
Example: Cameras
Start with Traditional Terms of Competition
Traditional job to be done:
How do I take great photos?  How do I “capture the moment?”
Traditional Terms of Competition:
Image quality
Control
Number and specialization of lenses
Capturing raw data for better post-processing
Knowledge of photography
Outside perspective
Careful and thoughtful perspective
Other features:
Heavy and bulky
Requires a strap and two hands
Lots of buttons

How can these traditional terms of competition and features be changed?
What new jobs to be done might then be found?
Step 1: Un-Constrain the Space
Change or reverse the terms of competition
What received wisdom can then be questioned?
What dominant designs can then be challenged?
What corporate (or societal) assumptions can then be challenged?
Regarding business models (i.e., how the company makes money now)
Regarding technologies?
Regarding user experiences?
Ask what if…

What new jobs to be done can be found either by 
by changing the terms of competition, or
by utilizing the original terms of competition in a different way?
Think in terms of raise, reduce, eliminate, create 
Think in terms of pains and gains

Step 2: Expand the Space
Identify new ill-defined and un-defined problems that can then be explored

What ill-defined problems can be found by changing or reversing the terms of competition; or by challenging existing paradigms?  For example, 
How do I take photos without…
What new kinds of photos can I take now (i.e. with new technology) that I could not take before?
Are there different problems that I can solve with this device??

What un-defined problems can be found by changing or reversing the terms of competition; or by challenging existing paradigms?  For example,
What is the future of professional photography?
What is the future of nature photography?
What is the future of sports photography and sports viewing?
The Next Big Thing
The Result
FROM:  a specialized instrument that
requires a bag of stuff to carry around and
takes great pictures from an outside perspective, but
only if you are experienced and know what you are doing.
TO:  an easy-to-use instrument that
lives inside the action,
takes good-enough pictures, and
goes where you cannot normally go.
The RESULT: GoPro.
EXAMPLE: BLUE OCEAN STRATEGY
W. Chan Kim and Renee Mauborgne
“Blue Ocean Strategy” 
(Harvard Business Review: Oct, 2004)
Red Oceans and Blue Oceans
… the business universe consists of two distinct kinds of space, which we think of as red and blue oceans. Red oceans represent all the industries in existence today-the known market space. In red oceans, industry boundaries are defined and accepted, and the competitive rules of the game are well understood. Here, companies try to outperform their rivals in order to grab a greater share of existing demand. As the space gets more and more crowded, prospects for profits and growth are reduced. Products turn into commodities, and increasing competition turns the water bloody.
Blue oceans denote all the industries not  in existence today – the unknown market space, untainted by competition. In blue oceans, demand is created rather than  fought over. There is ample opportunity for growth that is both profitable and rapid. There are two ways to create blue oceans:
In a few cases, companies can give rise to completely new industries, as eBay did with the online auction industry. 
But in most cases, a blue ocean is created from within a red ocean when a company alters the boundaries of an existing industry.

Four Actions Framework
To achieve value innovation, Kim and Mauborgne propose an analytical tool they call the Four Actions Framework. These four key questions challenge an industry’s strategic logic and established business model: 
Which of the factors that the industry takes for granted should be eliminated? 
Which factors should be reduced well below the industry standard? 
Which factors should be raised well above the industry standard? 
Which factors should be created that the industry has never offered? 

In addition to value innovation, Kim and Mauborgne propose exploring non-customer groups to create Blue Oceans and tap untouched markets. 

CASE STUDY: WINE


Wine is Old
Wine has been around for thousands of years in the countries surrounding the Mediterranean, but France has made it a part of their civilization and has considered wine-making as an art for over two thousand years. 
Not only did the Gauls know how to cultivate the vine, they also knew how to prune it, making the  difference between wild vines and wine producing grapes. Before long, the wines produced in Gaul were exceptionally famous all around the world.
French wines have set the standard for the wine industry for centuries.
Main Types of Wine 
Five Main Types of Wine
All wines can be organized into five basic groups. Within each group there are hundreds of different grape varieties and winemaking techniques! 
Red Wine: Still wine made with black grapes. Red wines range from light to bold.
White Wine: A still wine produced from white and occasionally black grapes. Flavors in white wines span from light to rich.
Rosé Wine: Still wine from black grapes produced by removing the skins before they stain the wine deep red. Rosé is also made by blending red and white wine together. Both dry and sweet styles of rosé are common.
Sparkling Wine: A style of winemaking involving a secondary fermentation that makes bubbles! Sparkling wine can be red, white, or rosé and ranges from lean and dry, to rich and sweet.
Dessert Wine: A style of winemaking involving fortifying wine with spirits. Typically, dessert wines taste sweet, but many dry, fortified wines exist, such as dry Sherry.
The Traditional Producers
Chateau Pichon-Longueville in Pauillac, Bordeaux  (France)
The Traditional Vocabulary
Common Words to Know on a French Wine Label
Cru – translates as “growth,” a favorable vineyard
Vielles Vignes – old vines
Château or Domaine – wine estate
Appellation d’Origine Protegée – AOP, highest tier of French wine
Indication Géographique Protégée – IGP, Regional French wines, middle tier of French wine
Vin de France – French table wines, lowest tier of French wine
Crémant – sparkling wine not from the Champagne region
Blanc – white
Rouge – red
Millésime or Récolte – vintage or harvest date
Cuvée – house blend
Réserve – implies a higher quality, but an unregulated term
Clos – translates as “an enclosure,” usually an enclosed vineyard

The Traditional Label
French Wine Label Basics:
Vintage 
Producer
Appellation title or “sub-region” 
Region and style 
Translates as “bottled at the estate” 
Alcohol content
Winery address 
Volume
Traditional Regions – Example: Bordeaux
Located in the southwest corner of France, this region’s bold red blends, based around Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot, are the benchmarks by which all other wines of this style are compared. Although there are dry and sweet white wines made primarily of Sauvignon Blanc and Sémillon, this is predominately a red wine region.
Primary Red Grapes – Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Cabernet Franc, Petit Verdot, Malbec, Carmenere
General Style – full-bodied, dry, earthy red wines
The region is divided by the Gironde Estuary. The regions to the West, or “Left Bank,” of the river produce wines based upon Cabernet Sauvignon, while the regions to the East, or “Right Bank,” of the river produce wines based primarily on Merlot. 
Major Left Bank Regions – Médoc, St. Julien, Pauillac, St. Estephe, Margaux, Graves, Pessac-Léognan
Major Right Bank Regions – Pomerol, St. Émilion

The Traditional Wine Shopping Experience
The Traditional Terms of Competition
Question: Along what lines do traditional wines compete?
Type of wine
Wine region
Terroir (location)
Aging
Flavor complexity
Length on the tongue
Balance
Chateau/Vineyard 
Reputation/Prestige
Prizes/distinctions
Ratings (more recently)  

The US Wine Market in 2000
Terms of Competition in 2000
How Should Casella Wines Enter This Market?
An Australian winery, Casella Wines, decided to enter the crowded US market
They were fairly late in the game….

Question:  How would you enter the US wine market? 
Answer:  Change the terms of competition…



The Four Actions Framework
New Terms of Competition
The Result
Yellowtail was introduced in 2001 to the US market with one red and one white wine offering in similarly shaped bottles, both selling at $6.99.
After two years, yellowtail became the leading import wine in the US market
By August 2003, it was overall US market leader in the 750-ml red wine category, beating out all domestic producers as well. 
Yellowtail pulled in approximately 6 million new wine drinkers in the US.

The Result
FROM:  Wine connoisseur looking for
a complex wine from a prestigious "terroir" and
a great year or "vintage" (i.e., the fine wine market, with ratings, reviews, books about terroirs/chateaux/years,  etc.) 
TO: Non-consumers of wine (or wine novices) looking for 
a simply flavored (not complex) wine 
from an undefined place of fun and adventure (implied to be Australia, but no exact info on where or when the wine was made), and
from undefined grapes. 
The RESULT: Yellow Tail, which drew in millions of non-consumers and became the most purchased wine in the US in less than 3 years.
THE PROCESS
Step 1: Start with Where You Are
The goal: un-constrain the original problem and find new ill-defined and un-defined problems

Start with where you are:
What is the distinctive advantage of the science?  What does the science allow you to do that you could not do before?
Identify the current job(s) to be done
List the current terms of competition of your product or invention
The traditional 
features and functionalities 
performance measures (i.e., those used by customers to evaluate current offerings)
customer groups 
emotions and images
positioning
by which companies compete (and their products and services) in an industry
Step 2: Un-Constrain the Space
Un-constrain the space by changing or reversing the terms of competition
What received wisdom can then be questioned?
What dominant designs can then be challenged?
What corporate (or societal) assumptions can then be challenged?
Regarding business models (i.e., how the company makes money now)
Regarding technologies?
Regarding user experiences?
Ask what if…

What new products/services can be found by changing the terms of competition
Think in terms of raise, reduce, eliminate, create (The Four Actions Framework)
What new jobs to be done can be found by utilizing the original terms of competition in a different way?
Think in terms of pains and gains
Are there different trade-offs that can be made that will indicate different jobs to be done?
Are there niche applications?


Step 3: Expand the Space
Expand the space by

creating new ill-defined problems by changing or reversing the terms of competition (or by challenging existing paradigms):
For example, how do I take photos without…

creating new un-defined problems changing or reversing the terms of competition (or by challenging existing paradigms):
For example, what is the future of…

Where are the high uncertainty/low risk opportunities?
You Try It – How Would You Get to Radio?
Start with the Current Terms of Competition
Current job to be done:
Send important messages from point to point where there are no wires
Traditional terms of competition:
Wires
Two-way devices
Turn-taking (serial) communication
Mysterious code that required translation into plain language
Skilled operators
Important messages
Very short messages, often cryptic
Limited access

Which terms can be changed in order to find a new job to be done?
Ask what if….

Expand the Problem Space
What un-defined and ill-defined problems can be found by changing the terms of competition?  Problems that can then be explored for opportunities:

Ill-defined:
What is the next big thing for ground communication?
What is the next big thing for wireless telegraphy and business information?
What is the next big thing for wireless telegraphy and selling?
How can wireless telegraphy contribute to market efficiency?
What is the next big thing for how governments communicate with the public (or the public with the government)?
What is the next big thing for military command and communication?
What are the opportunities for combining wireless telegraphy with the telephone?
What are the opportunities for combining wireless telegraphy with ….?
Un-defined:
What is the future of telegraphy?
What is the future of communication?
What is the future of public information?
The Result
FROM:  a specialized instrument that
sent two-way important messages 
from point to point where there were no wires, and 
required training and expertise to use
TO: a general instrument that
sent unimportant messages 
to nobody in particular
in order to entertain them (manipulate them?) into buying something, and
required no expertise to use.
The RESULT: a mass market that could be exploited by businesses, governments, and politicians.
CASE STUDY:
THE ADAPTIVE AIR MATTRESS
The power of inversion
Example: A New Design for a Mattress
Our product is designed such that there are two air chambers: a large lower chamber that prevents contact with the ground, and an upper grid to distribute pressure uniformly along the length of the body. 
The top grid consists of connected, individual pockets that are at the same pressure, but can individually contract depending on applied pressure.



Where is the Market?
Terms of Competition
Current terms of competition (features):
Expensive
Thin
Extremely light weight
Strong support where it is needed 
Temperature control
Instantaneous adaptation to body movement and pressure points

Would you really want to change or reverse any of these terms?
Instead, start with the current job to be done:
Prevent pressure ulcers in bed-ridden patients
Is there a better job to be done, or a better problem to address? 
Are there different trade-offs that can be made that will indicate different jobs to be done?
Are there niche applications?

Expanding the Problem Space
Are there other jobs to be done that could take advantage of these terms of competition?
E.g., prevent muscle and joint pain (and keep blood flowing) when you cannot move (or cannot move very much)
Are there relevant un-defined problems that can be explored?
What is the future of the mattress?
What is the future of the office chair?
Are there relevant ill-defined problems that can be explored?
What is the next big thing for comfortable sleep?
What is the next big thing for long-term sitting?
What is the next big thing for your guest room?

The Result
The Result
FROM:  a specialized bed that
would prevent pressure ulcers,
required a large frame,
required clinical studies and proof and possibly FDA registration,
would entail a long sales cycle to a large healthcare institution.
TO:  a general bed that
was light and compact enough to carry around,
prevented back and muscle pain even when placed on uneven ground,
provided the right amount of support regardless of weight, 
controlled for temperature,
conformed near instantaneously to the body’s pressure points, and
could be sold direct to consumers or to outdoor equipment stores.

The RESULT:  a bed appropriate for campers, where price does not really matter.
You Try It
Exercise: Ill-Defined (terms of competition)
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – choose an ill-defined problem of interest to you, i.e. what is the next big thing in this market or technological space:
What are the relevant terms of competition?
Use terms of competition or the Four Actions Framework as relevant to
Challenge the industry's’ terms of competition, its current strategic logic, and current offerings (i.e., current products and markets).
Challenge the industry’s assumptions and orthodoxies. 
What problems are not being adequately addressed?
What is missing in the marketplace?
Where are the opportunities (maximum 3)? 
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (opportunities), not the solution.  Think in terms of jobs to be done.
WHITE SPACE MAPPING


Using terms of competition to find opportunities

White Space Mapping: Challenging Assumptions
Finding the Holes
Scientific puzzle solving is like jigsaw-puzzle solving in another way as well. When enough pieces have been fitted together, they may define either a whole or a hole. Both are valuable. 
The whole is a new structure that makes sense of the available data. 
But the hole—what is not there—is also useful because it is a valuable clue to the shape of our ignorance. 
Having defined that shape, we can now look for specific pieces to fill the hole. Our search for linkages is no longer random. We have a specific question to answer and definite criteria to use in evaluating possible answers. 
Almost every scientist of note has said something along the lines of “properly defining your question gets you more than halfway to its solution.” Questions, from this point of view, are also patterns.

Example: Whitespace Maps
Example: Whitespace Maps
Where is the Opportunity?
The Process
Choose a domain of interest to you
Identify relevant terms of competition in that domain
Choose two as axes (price is often a good one)
Create a whitespace map based on current products or services or companies in that domain
Where are the opportunities?  Where are the next big problems to solve?
Examples
Examples:
Education
Music
Retail
LinkedIn
SpaceX
Apple’s healthcare business
Google’s healthcare business
Packaging
A food category
A clothing category
A cosmetic category
Personal mobility
A hospital
Hotels
Exercise: Ill-Defined (industry space)
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – choose an ill-defined problem of interest to you, i.e. what is the next big thing in this market or technological space:
What are the relevant terms of competition?
Use terms of competition and whitespace maps as relevant to
Challenge the industry's’ terms of competition, its current strategic logic, and current offerings (i.e., current products and markets).
Question assumptions and orthodoxies. 
What problems are not being adequately addressed?
What is missing in the marketplace?
Where are the opportunities (maximum 3)? 
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (opportunities), not the solution.  Think in terms of  jobs to be done
THE INNOVATION OF MEANING
Roberto Verganti
Overcrowded: Designing Meaningful Products in a World Awash with Ideas
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology: 2016)
The Innovation of Meaning
How to create innovations that people love? Research in different domains has shown that we don’t buy products, ideas, technologies, or features alone. We buy meanings. 
The more meaningful something is, the more we are attracted to it. Innovation has typically been seen as a matter of “problem solving”. Firms compete to provide better solutions to problems. From this perspective meanings are considered something to understand, not something to innovate. But meanings cannot merely be understood. Meanings can also change and be innovated.
…innovation driven by design is and how it stands apart from other approaches of innovation. It shows that design is related to the innovation of the meaning of products and services: an innovation that concerns the purpose, the ‘why’ people use things, rather than the functionality and performance of products (i.e. the ‘what’ and ‘how’).
Example:  “Consumption-driven wealth and status are being replaced by identity, belonging, and a strong desire to contribute and do something “meaningful” rather than just acquire things.”

Example
Example
Look Beyond Features and Functions
…people do not buy products but meanings. People use things for profound emotional, psychological, and sociocultural reasons as well as utilitarian ones. Analysts have shown that every product and service in consumer as well as industrial markets has a meaning. Firms should therefore look beyond features, functions, and performance and understand the real meanings users give to things. The common assumption, however, is that meanings are not a subject for innovation: they are a given. One must understand them but cannot innovate them. 
Innovation has therefore focused on two strategies: quantum leaps in product performance enabled by breakthrough technologies, and improved product solutions enabled by better analysis of users’ needs. The former is the domain of radical innovation pushed by technology, and the latter of incremental innovation pulled by the market. 
People Do Not Buy Products, They Buy Meaning
However, companies such as Nintendo, Apple, Artemide, Whole Foods Market, Alessi, and many others discussed in this book show that meanings do change—and that they can change radically. These firms therefore also purse a third strategy: design-driven innovation— that is, radical innovation of meaning. Think for example at the Nintendo Wii that transformed consoles from a passive immersion in a virtual world approachable only by niche experts into an active physical entertainment for everyone, in the real world, through socialization. Or at Whole Foods Market, that has radically changed the meaning of healthy nutrition from a severe, self-denying choice to a hedonic one, and shopping from a chore to a reinvigorating experience.
These firms have not provided people with an improved interpretation of what they already mean by, and expect from, a console or an organic food store. Rather, they have proposed a different and unsolicited meaning, that was what people were actually waiting for. 
THE DESIGN-DRIVEN INNOVATIONS INTRODUCED BY THESE FIRMS HAVE NOT COME FROM THE MARKET BUT HAVE CREATED HUGE MARKETS. They have generated products, services, and systems with long lives, significant and sustainable profit margins, and brand value, and they have spurred company growth.
New Meaning as the Driver of Value
Creating innovations of meaning brings your interaction with customers to a higher level: the level of love. It focuses on what worth really is: value for a person. People do not fall in love with a better  performance. That's a date. Love for a person, as well as for anything in life, comes from meaning. The best metaphor for describing innovation of meaning is to think of it as a "gift.”
In our current world, however, the main driver of value is not just meaning, but new meaning. Customers nowadays face an unprecedented scenario: their context changes at an extreme speed, and therefore their problems and search for meaning keep changing. Companies that focus on innovating solutions often find themselves launching a great new product that unfortunately solves a problem that meanwhile has become old. There is no value in a better performance if this performance is no longer meaningful. 

Give People a New Reason to Buy
Therefore,
…compete through products and services that have a radical new meaning: those that convey a completely new reason for customers to buy them. 
Layers of Meaning
Example: Peleton
Example: Blue Apron
Blue Apron Inc. is an American ingredient-and-recipe meal kit company headquartered in New York City, operating its services exclusively in the United States. It offers weekly boxes containing ingredients, which also includes suggested recipes that must be cooked by hand by the customer using the pre-ordered ingredients.
The vision: Our food system—the way in which food is grown and distributed—is complicated, and making good choices for your family can be difficult. We are changing that: By partnering with farmers to raise the highest-quality ingredients, by creating a distribution system that delivers ingredients at a better value and by investing in the things that matter most—our environment and our communities. This will be a decades-long effort, but with each Blue Apron home chef, together we can build a better food system.
Example: Mobile Phones
From:						    To:
More Examples
Building a kitchen 
Riding a scooter
Social media
Buying clothes
Cosmetics

Class Exercise: What is this Thing?
What meaning does this thing have for you? How can this meaning be changed?
Think about the terms of competition

You try it:
Using a car
Wearing a wristwatch
Going to the library
Going to public parks
Your choice??
How can changing the meaning of a thing be used to create (find) big opportunities?  Where are the next big problems to solve?
The Process
Choose a domain of particular interest to you (e.g. user experience, product, or service)
Identify the current terms of competition
Identify the current job to be done
Can you imagine a new job to be done, or a new way of perceiving the current product or service?
Think about other jobs to be done that could benefit from re-purposing the current product or service
What other emotional or social needs could filled by this offering, either with or without changing the terms of competition 
Where are the opportunities to create new meanings?
Examples
Examples:
Treating patients
Making people healthier
Baking a cake
Learning something new
Farming
Getting rid of garbage
Music (enjoying?; creating?)
Using a car
Wearing a wristwatch
Going to the library
Going to public parks
Your choice???
Exercise: Changes in Meaning
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – what is the space you explored?  Show your research.
What is the current meaning of this thing (product, service, or user experience)?
What are the relevant terms of competition?  
What is the current job to be done?  
How can the meaning of this thing be changed by changing the terms of competition or by finding a different job to be done?
Where are the opportunities?  Where is the next big problem to solve (maximum 3)? 
Remember to focus on problems to be solved (opportunities), not the solution.  Think in terms of uses cases:
What is the problem? 
Who has the problem? 
Why do they have the problem? 



5. Fixing Food Insecurity in Burkina Faso 
Violence, COVID Restrictions, and Climate Change
Food Supply ↓ and Food Prices ↑
Almost 1/3 of children under 5 suffer from chronic malnutrition 
10% of the country suffers from acute malnutrition
> 1 Million People Displaced in Burkina Faso (August 2020)
Schools and healthcare facilities targeted by armed groups
Poor infrastructure in displacement camps, lack of cooling and storage systems. Electrical outages occur often.
WICKED PROBLEMS



Wicked Problems
A wicked problem is a social or cultural problem that is difficult or impossible to solve for as many as four reasons: 
incomplete or contradictory knowledge, 
the number of people and opinions involved, 
the large economic burden, and 
the interconnected nature of these problems with other problems. 
Example: poverty is linked with education, nutrition with poverty, the economy with nutrition, and so on. 

These problems are typically offloaded to policy makers, or are written off as being too cumbersome to handle en masse. 
Yet these are the problems—poverty, sustainability, equality, and health and wellness—that plague our cities and our world and that touch each and every one of us. 

Characteristics of Wicked Problems
Horst Rittel, one of the first to formalize a theory of wicked problems, cites ten characteristics of these complicated social issues:
Wicked problems have no definitive formulation. The problem of poverty in Texas is grossly similar but discretely different from poverty in Nairobi, so no practical characteristics describe “poverty.” 
It’s hard, maybe impossible, to measure or claim success with wicked problems because they bleed into one another, unlike the boundaries of traditional design problems that can be articulated or defined. 
Solutions to wicked problems can be only good or bad, not true or false. There is no idealized end state to arrive at, and so approaches to wicked problems should be tractable ways to improve a situation rather than solve it. 
There is no template to follow when tackling a wicked problem, although history may provide a guide. Teams that approach wicked problems must literally make things up as they go along. 
There is always more than one explanation for a wicked problem, with the appropriateness of the explanation depending greatly on the individual perspective of the designer. 
Every wicked problem is a symptom of another problem. The interconnected quality of socio-economic political systems illustrates how, for example, a change in education will cause new behavior in nutrition. 
No mitigation strategy for a wicked problem has a definitive scientific test because humans invented wicked problems and science exists to understand natural phenomena. 
Offering a “solution” to a wicked problem frequently is a “one shot” design effort because a significant intervention changes the design space enough to minimize the ability for trial and error.
Every wicked problem is unique. 
Designers attempting to address a wicked problem must be fully responsible for their actions.

WICKED PROBLEMS ARE SYSTEMS PROBLEMS
Reminder: What are Systems?
﻿A system is an interconnected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something. 
If you look at that definition closely for a minute, you can see that a system must consist of three kinds of things: 
elements, 
interconnections, and 
a function or purpose.
﻿Systems can be embedded in systems, which are embedded in yet other systems. 
Is there anything that is not a system? Yes—a conglomeration without any particular interconnections or function. Sand scattered on a road by happenstance is not, itself, a system.
﻿A system is more than the sum of its parts. It may exhibit adaptive, dynamic, goal-seeking, self-preserving, and sometimes evolutionary behavior.
Implications
A system is the product of the interactions of its subsystems, and not the sum of its parts.
To improve the system, do not focus on improving the performance of its parts, but how well the parts interact. 
Sometimes it is necessary to worsen the performance of a part of the system in order to improve the functioning of the whole (e.g., an engine that is too powerful for a car’s transmission or brakes). Other times the interrelationship needs to be changed or improved.
There is, therefore, no such thing as a ‘marketing’… ‘sales’… ‘production’… ‘personnel’… ‘financial’… problem. 
The solution is, in the majority of cases, in areas different from where they appear (e.g., a sales problem may be due to a production coordination problem), and lies instead in the interactions of these subsystems.
SYSTEMS MAPPING



Cause and Effect Diagrams
﻿Systems mapping is used to visualize and analyze the factors that make up a system. 
In its most comprehensive form, systems mapping combines 
causal loop mapping with 
stock and flow diagrams, 
creating a detailed diagram that displays the factors involved as well as the cause and effect influences between them.
We are Embedded in a Larger System
The Building Blocks: Feedback Loops
Reinforcing process arise from what is known as positive feedback…. In systems terminology, it means information that compounds change in one direction with even more change in that direction. In other words, successive changes add to the previous changes and keep the change going in the same direction.
The world does change but it does so on a platform of great stability. What accounts for this constancy? It is balancing loops.... Balancing loops are generally stabilizing or goal seeking. They resist change in one direction which produces change in the opposite direction, which negates the previous effects. (This is why they are also called negative feedback loops.)

Directions of Change
An “s” indicates that as one variable changes, the next variable changes in the same direction. (Or, the first variable adds to the second variable.)
An “o” indicates that as one variable changes, the other variable changes in the opposite direction. (Or, the first variable subtracts from the second variable.)
Caution: once a loop gets going, it is hard to tell what is driving what.
Example
Example
You Try It – Where are the S’s and O’s?
Stocks and Flows
Stock and Flow Diagrams
Causal Loop Diagrams and Stocks and Flows
For example, consider the simple reinforcing loop of Births and Population. Because Births is a flow (representing the rate of increase in Population), and Population is a stock, a CLD (causal loop diagram) does not represent this system as accurately as does a stock and flow diagram. In the CLD, both links in this loop are “s” links, indicating that as Births increase, Population increases (a change in the same direction), and as Population increases, Births increase (another change in the same direction).
However, this representation is not completely accurate. If Birth Rate declines, causing Births to decrease, say from 1000 to 900 per month, Population does not in turn decrease; it continues to increase, only at a slower rate than before. Thus the “s” link from Births to Population is accurate only when Births is increasing, because Births and Population do not move in the same direction when Births decrease.
In contrast, a stock and flow diagram makes it visually apparent that Births is an inflow to Population and thus can only increase it, not decrease it (because there cannot be a negative number of births). This distinction between stocks and flows makes stock and flow diagrams a more accurate rendition of the system being represented.
Comparison of Stocks and Flows to Causal Loops
A DETAILED EXAMPLE


http://www.academyforchange.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/Fishery-Causal-Loop-Diagram-2011.9.pdf
Introduction
This fishery causal loop diagram reveals one way of seeing the system of fishery and ocean conservation, the theory of change of various interventions and how they interact with each other. 
By making each stakeholder’s mental model explicit, it enables people to understand each other’s perspective, examine one’s underlying assumptions about the change process logically and objectively, and sense‐make the whole system collectively. 
This is work‐in‐progress, it is intended for fostering multi‐stakeholder dialogue and collaboration through collective modeling building. We hope the process of revising this model collectively will allow us to deepen mutual understanding, see the current reality, form a shared vision and identify high‐leverage points for creating together what we truly desire. 












Summary
R1 (Fish Regenera8on Loop): More adult fish leads to more regeneration rate for a given fractional regeneration rate, which generates more adult fish a9er the maturation time delay. This is the key regeneration loop that causes fish population to grow over time . 
B2 (Limits to Growth Loop): Healthy ecosystem in the diagram denotes carrying capacity. There is a carrying capacity in the marine ecosystem that supports a given amount of fish population. More fish, higher fish density for a given carrying capacity (thus less nutrients per fish), which leads to lower fractional regeneration rate. When total fish population reaches its carrying capacity, reproduction slows down, as there is no more capacity to support further population growth. Starting from a small population relative to this carrying capacity, the fish population over time will grow and eventually stabilizes near this carrying capacity. 
R2 (Race for Fish Loop): less adult fish stock, less catch per unit effort, which lowers fishing income and drives up fishing effort. More fishing effort increases catch and further declines fish stock. This is a key reinforcing loop that causes the fishery to collapse. 
R3 (Fish Price Loop): overfishing (both legal and illegal catch) causes market price to collapse and reduces income, which drives up fishing effort and leads to further overfishing. 
R4 (Erosion of Carrying Capacity Loop): more fishing effort leads to more habitat damage and erodes carrying capacity, which lowers regeneration rate and increases mortality rate that leads to fishery decline. 
R5 (Economic Growth Loop): less fishing income leads to more non‐fishing activities such as aquaculture and agriculture. Without proper regulation, these economic activities increase pollution and cause faster erosion of healthy ecosystem. 
R6 (Healthy Ecosystem Loop): habit conservation and pollution regulation improve ecosystem health, which attract eco‐tourism as alternative income, reduce fishing effort and polluting activities, and further improve ecosystem health. 
R7 (Sustainable Fish Loop): healthy ecosystem improves fish quality. Under Catch Shares program, fishermen have incentives to improve the health of fishery, which could lead to higher price premium for certified fish. Higher price allows fishermen to meet their income target with lower catch, which helps restore the fish stock. 
R8 (Civic Engagement Loop): sense of urgency, program benefits and stakeholder trust building increase civic engagement in program implementation, which further reinforce program benefits, trust building and civic engagement. This is a key implementation loop for scaling up the fishery restoration. 

A BETTER EXAMPLE:
TELLING A STORY
How to Reduce Frustration in Your Life?
Then Add a Bird Feeder
Positive Feedback Loop
All Good
Unintended Consequences
It Gets Worse
And Worse
And Worse
Have I Really Reduced Frustration In My Life?
SOLVING SYSTEMS PROBLEMS
Opportunities for innovation
“Solving” a Systems Problem: Leverage Points
Addressing the root causes of problems requires that participants identify “leverage points” that impact the whole system, and address those leverage points in a strategic, coordinated effort that sustains over time.
Leverage points are places in a system where, as systems theorist Donella Meadows has said, “a small shift in one thing can produce big changes in everything.” 
Leverage points are like acupuncture points — places where a finely tuned, strategic intervention is capable of creating lasting change, creating positive ripple effects that spread far and wide.
How to Use Leverage Points
Change the flow rates – what can we slow down and what can we speed up in order to positively impact the system?
Decoupling – which subsystems can be disconnected in order to positively impact the system?
Add a feedback loop – Feedback loops employ information to prompt action. For example, when the thermostat reaches a certain temperature, it turns on the AC system to provide cooler air. Rather than being stuck in the inertia of doing what we always do, new information gives us the opportunity to behave differently.
New subsystems – are there new subsystems that can be added to positively impact the system?
Challenge assumptions – Everything in a system — its elements, interconnections, feedback loops — bends towards the achievement of its goal. This insight leads to our final two tools. First, many systems get stuck with certain assumptions about how the goal is supposed to be achieved. 
Change the rules – can the rules that govern a subsystem (or the system as a whole) be changed in order to positively impact the system? Rules are formalized interconnections. They dictate how different elements are supposed to interact within a system. Changing rules can produce drastic changes in behavior. 
Change the goal – If the most important part of a system is its goal, then our most powerful tool is changing that goal. Changing a goal often starts with simply questioning the behavior or outcomes that a system produces.
BACK TO BURKINA FASO



Food Insecurity is the Result, Not the Cause
A Systems Approach
Possible Leverage Points
NGOs need to cooperate to set up vocational camps, and provide sustainable infrastructure to minimize the food crisis
International organizations need to help locals record cultural agricultural practices and teach new ways to better used the lands they have been forced to relocate to. 
Improve irrigation techniques to lands vulnerable to droughts and floods
Change COVID-19 Policy since more people (especially children) are dying from malnutrition than the viral infection
Improve the infrastructure for internally displaced people who have no A/C, no refrigerators, and constant electrical outages. This causes less food to be stored and temperature-maintained food to go bad quickly.
Establish centers near displacement sites and places of high food insecurity that provide vocational support to children and as a source of food
The national government needs to impose restrictions on large private corporations that are using slave labor and exploiting child labor in their gold mines. These corporations should be forced to provide more community relief.
Identify community leaders to increase national and local communication.
Use alternative energy source to decrease power outages and increase employment
The Process
Choose a domain of interest to you
Research that domain to understand the factors involved
Identify the relevant sub-systems
Draw a systems map
Identify points of leverage – think in terms of ill-defined problems
Where are the opportunities for innovation (products, services, policies)?
Examples
Problems that require fixing:
Urban poverty
Rural poverty
International drug trafficking
Political corruption
Increasing political tribalization
Food insecurity
Access to education and higher-level skills
Solid waste
Saving Venice
Your choice??
Exercise: Systems Problems
Deliverable:
Cover slide
Background – choose a domain of interest to you.  What are the relevant trends in that particular space?  Show your research.
Why is this a systems problem?
Include a systems map and identify possible leverage points and opportunities (maximum 3)
Think in terms of ill-defined problems
Think in terms of new products, services, and policies
Where are the opportunities for innovation?
APPENDIX:
SYSTEMS THINKING
Ackoff’s Pyramid
Basics of Systems Thinking
We build knowledge from information we are taking in from our senses
Mental models are how we structure knowledge, and determine how we perceive, feel, and act
Thinking is how we build meaning from knowledge
Four patterns determine how we build mental models:
We make distinctions (using all of our senses) between things and things (e.g., drink and food) because everything has an identity (i.e., we see what a thing is and what it is is not which makes it unique and not something else)
We organize things into systems of parts and wholes (whether simple or complex)
We identify relationships (i.e., interactions) among the parts and wholes, whether reaction and re-action or cause and effect (whether between and among people, objects, or ideas)
We take perspectives from a point or a view on the world around us (parts and wholes; and relationships) as we navigate the world ad think about it; and what we think is determined by our mental models (e.g., compassion, empathy, distance)

And mental models determine how we make distinctions, organize parts into wholes, identify relationships, and take perspectives
Sometimes we care about the parts, and sometimes we care about the whole; but we can never ignore how they relate to each other; i.e., behavior
APPENDIX:
SYSTEMS THINKING
Russ Ackoff
Analysis
The Dominance of Analysis  
Analysis is the dominant form of thinking today. To take the whole apart to understand its parts, how they work, fit together, etc. It requires a reduction to indivisible parts, e.g., atoms in physics, elements in chemistry, cellular components in biology, etc. (Subject to level of analysis issues)

Cause and Effect 
In the analytical framework, the relation of things is itself reducible: to cause and effect. 
Major assumptions: Causes and effects must exclude the environment (e.g., bodies falling in a vacuum), and there is limited role for chance or randomness. Pierre Simon Laplace: “We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its past and the cause of its future.”  
Causes can be followed back to the first cause (i.e., God).  
Isaac Newton: The universe is a machine, created by God.
General Systems Theory
Ludwig Bertalanffy’s General Systems Theory changed thinking to look at systems.

A system is a whole that consists of two or more parts, such that: 
each part can affect the behavior of the whole; 
each part cannot independently affect the whole -- but interacts with or affects the others;
the subsets of the parts have similar systemic properties. 

When a system is taken apart it loses its essential properties.  Therefore: you cannot understand a system through analysis.

It is not the sum of its parts but the product of its interactions. Its interactions need to be understood.

Synthesis
See the system in question as part of a larger system, i.e., what is the system a component of? (e.g. the University is part of the larger educational system)

Consider the larger system or systems it is part of (e.g. the educational system, the society, etc.)  

Understand the role or function of the subsystem within the larger system (e.g. what is the role of the University in the educational system?)

Describe the parts that are essential to the system in question and how they interact: It is the relations of the subsystems that are the keys to improvement, not the functioning of the subsystems themselves.  

Synthesis, continued…
Some implications: 
A system is the product of the interactions of its subsystems, and not the sum of its parts.
To improve the system, do not focus on improving the performance of its parts, but how well the parts interact. Sometimes it is necessary to worsen the performance of a part of the system in order to improve the functioning of the whole (e.g., an engine that is too powerful for a car’s transmission or brakes). Other times the interrelationship needs to be changed or improved.
There is, therefore, no such thing as a ‘marketing’… ‘sales’… ‘production’… ‘personnel’… ‘financial’… problem. The solution is, in the majority of cases, in areas different from where they appear (e.g., a sales problem may be due to a production coordination problem), and lies instead in the interactions of these subsystems.
Analysis vs. Synthesis
Analysis reveals how it works (what does each part do?) 
Synthesis reveals why it works the way it does (why it does what it does in its environment).
Determinism vs. Teleology

Systems thinking is the fusion of analysis and synthesis.

From Mechanistic to Systemic Thinking 
Machines are created to serve a function for their creator. 
Organisms are created with purposes of their own.  

In business, we have moved from sole proprietors to corporations. A single-owner business exists for the owner. The corporation exists in and of itself, and is self-perpetuating (its owners are diffuse and mortal, but the corporation isn’t). Note that the language changes to biological: corpus/corporis.
Ackoff: Purposes
Some Observations: 
Machine Age thinking often involves the pursuit of the wrong ends: We care about efficiency (how to do something economically) as opposed to effectiveness (what to do and why).   We do the wrong thing rightly as opposed to the right thing wrongly. 

Examples: 
The health care system: More realistically the “sick and disabled system,” as the incentive (and provider pay) is to treat the sick and disabled. The focus is on the efficient maintenance of sick people. The incentives, ironically, lead to more sick and disabled people, not healthier ones. 

The education system:  The objective of college should not be to teach more efficiently. It should be to get students to learn how to learn (perhaps by teaching the teachers) and to be motivated to do it.  

THINKING IN SYSTEMS


DONELLA H. MEADOWS
﻿Edited by Diana Wright
(Sustainability Institute CHELSEA GREEN PUBLISHING: 2008)
Introduction
﻿A system is an interconnected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something. 
If you look at that definition closely for a minute, you can see that a system must consist of three kinds of things: 
elements, 
interconnections, and 
a function or purpose.
﻿Systems can be embedded in systems, which are embedded in yet other systems. 
Is there anything that is not a system? Yes—a conglomeration without any particular interconnections or function. Sand scattered on a road by happenstance is not, itself, a system.
﻿A system is more than the sum of its parts. It may exhibit adaptive, dynamic, goal-seeking, self-preserving, and sometimes evolutionary behavior.
How Do You Know?
﻿How to know whether you are looking at a system or just a bunch of stuff: 
Can you identify parts? . . . and 
Do the parts affect each other? . . . and 
Do the parts together produce an effect that is different from the effect of each part on its own? . . . and perhaps 
Does the effect, the behavior over time, persist in a variety of circumstances?
The Flow of Information
﻿Many of the interconnections in systems operate through the flow of information. Information holds systems together and plays a great role in determining how they operate.
﻿If information-based relationships are hard to see, functions or purposes are even harder. A system’s function or purpose is not necessarily spoken, written, or expressed explicitly, except through the operation of the system. The best way to deduce the system’s purpose is to watch for a while to see how the system behaves.
﻿Purposes are deduced from behavior, not from rhetoric or stated goals.
﻿An important function of almost every system is to ensure its own perpetuation.
﻿Keeping sub-purposes and overall system purposes in harmony is an essential function of successful systems.
﻿A change in purpose changes a system profoundly, even if every element and interconnection remains the same.
Stocks and Flows
﻿A stock is the foundation of any system. Stocks are the elements of the system that you can see, feel, count, or measure at any given time. A system stock is just what it sounds like: a store, a quantity, an accumulation of material or information that has built up over time. It may be the water in a bathtub, a population, the books in a bookstore, the wood in a tree, the money in a bank, your own self-confidence. A stock does not have to be physical.
﻿ ﻿A stock is the memory of the history of changing flows within the system.
Stocks change over time through the actions of a flow. Flows are filling and draining, births and deaths, purchases and sales, growth and decay, deposits and withdrawals, successes and failures. A stock, then, is the present memory of the history of changing flows within the system.
Examples
Feedback Loops
﻿﻿Systems thinkers see the world as a collection of stocks along with the mechanisms for regulating the levels in the stocks by manipulating flows. That means system thinkers see the world as a collection of “feedback processes.”

A feedback loop is formed when changes in a stock affect the flows into or out of that same stock.

﻿Feedback loops can cause stocks to maintain their level within a range or grow or decline. In any case, the flows into or out of the stock are adjusted because of changes in the size of the stock itself. Whoever or whatever is monitoring the stock’s level begins a corrective process, adjusting rates of inflow or outflow (or both) and so changing the stock’s level. The stock level feeds back through a chain of signals and actions to control itself.

﻿A feedback loop is a closed chain of causal connections from a stock, through a set of decisions or rules or physical laws or actions that are dependent on the level of the stock, and back again through a flow to change the stock.
Balancing and Reinforcing Feedbacks
﻿Balancing feedback loops are equilibrating or goal-seeking structures in systems and are both sources of stability and sources of resistance to change.
﻿The presence of a feedback mechanism doesn’t necessarily mean that the mechanism works well. The feedback mechanism may not be strong enough to bring the stock to the desired level. Feedbacks—the interconnections, the information part of the system—can fail for many reasons. Information can arrive too late or at the wrong place. It can be unclear or incomplete or hard to interpret. The action it triggers may be too weak or delayed or resource-constrained or simply ineffective.
﻿The second kind of feedback loop is amplifying, reinforcing, self-multiplying, snowballing—a vicious or virtuous circle that can cause healthy growth or runaway destruction. It is called a reinforcing feedback loop, and will be noted with an R in the diagrams. It generates more input to a stock the more that is already there (and less input the less that is already there). A reinforcing feedback loop enhances whatever direction of change is imposed on it.
﻿Reinforcing feedback loops are self-enhancing, leading to exponential growth or to runaway collapses over time. They are found whenever a stock has the capacity to reinforce or reproduce itself.
LEARN TO THINK IN SYSTEMS
ALBERT RUTHERFORD
(KINDLE DIRECT PUBLISHING: 2019)
Parts of a System
﻿Systems are made up of three parts:
Elements; 
Interconnections;
Functions or purpose. 
The word “function” is used when talking about a non-human system, and the word “purpose” is used for human systems. 
Elements are the actors in the system. 
The interconnections show the relationship of these actors with one another. 
The function or purpose is the voluntary or involuntary motivator and catalyst for the elements’ interconnections.
Stocks and Flows
﻿Donella Meadows, in her book Thinking in Systems: A Primer, refers to stocks and flows as being the foundation of every system.
Stock:  A stock can be something physical, like the amount of money in your account, your business inventory, or the information needed to write a book. However, stocks don’t necessarily have to be physical things. They can also be feelings or attitudes people hold. The amount of anger you hold toward a cheating spouse or an alcoholic parent can also be viewed as a stock. Stocks are not static. They change over time based on the impacts of a flow. Stocks are snapshots in time, showing a current condition of the changing flows in the system. 
Flow:  Flows are the actions that impact a system. A flow might be a success or a failure, purchases or sales, deposits or withdrawals, births or deaths, or growths or declines. To illustrate how flows impact the stocks, I’ve added Picture 3. The rectangle stands for the stock. This stock is affected by two flows, specifically an inflow and an outflow. Stocks can be affected by multiple inflows and outflows, but for the sake of simplicity let’s stick to only one of each. The little clouds represent where the flows come from or go. Flows can be increased or decreased through intervention.
The General Rules of Stocks and Flows
﻿If there are more inflows than outflows, the level of stock will increase. 
If there are more outflows than inflows, the level of stock will decrease. 
If the amount of outflows and inflows is equal, the stock level will remain at its current level and will be unchanged. This is called dynamic equilibrium. 
The level of a stock is increased if its outflow is decreased or its inflow is increased. 
Stocks provide a security barrier in a system, since they serve to delay the initial shock that may affect a system. 
Stocks preserve the ability of inflows and outflows to remain independent.
COMPONENTS
﻿Systems dynamics show the nonlinear behavior tendencies of complex systems. 
With the help of stocks, flows, feedbacks, and delays we can detect how quickly changes happen within the system. Often the behavior of the whole system can’t be explained based only on the behavior of its individual parts. In other words, determining what kinds of interactions are at play between the elements is very important. 
Stocks and flows are the building blocks of the systems dynamics model. 
The components of systems stories are: 
Variables; 
Links; 
Mental Models; 
Direction of Links; 
Delays; 
Feedback Loops
Variables
﻿Variables are usually neutral nouns. They present elements in situations where behavior patterns change over time. 
David Peter Stroh, a systems thinking expert, defines variables as “the nouns of Systems Thinking language. They are the key forces in a systems story that impact each other and change, or literally vary, over time. As such they are critical elements in building a compelling understanding of what has been happening and why. Systems Thinking has the advantage of being able to combine quantitative variables such as profits with qualitative variables such as morale.”
Variables in systems thinking language have a few strict characteristics. Besides being neutral nouns, they are not events. The value of a variable can go up and down over time. The nouns you use for variables should incorporate the level of change over time.
﻿Performance measuring variables: When we want to solve a complex problem with the help of systems thinking, we usually face an issue with more than one “symptom of dysfunction.” It’s a good idea to also have more than one performance measure we wish to understand and change.
﻿Stroh identifies and groups five types of general variables: “
Goals 
Desired level of __________ 
Thinking/feeling/perceptions  
Level of commitment to __________ 
Level of alignment around __________ 
Level of clarity about __________ 
Perceived level of __________ 
Morale 
Demand  
Pressure to __________ 
Need for __________ 
Demand to __________ 
Gap between __________ and __________ 
Competitive Pressure 
Supply  
Capacity for __________ 
Ability to __________ 
Available resources (e.g., time/people/experience) for __________ 
Investment in __________ 
Results  
Actual level of performance (e.g., profitability, revenue, cycle time, cost, turnover, customer satisfaction, market share) 
Quality of __________”
Links and the Direction of Links
﻿To discover and understand links, one should select a variable and ask: 
What are possible causes for an increase or decrease in this variable? Name these factors as variables (nouns, something that can increase or decrease). 
What are the possible consequences or effects of an increase or decrease in this variable? Name these effects as variables.
﻿We can assess which direction the first variable will pull the second. In systems thinking language, we differentiate two directions: the same direction (S) or the opposite direction (O).
﻿When you design a feedback or causal diagram, it’s good to indicate the direction of your links. This practice not only makes the diagram easier to follow but also helps to discover possible missing variables that could add important information to the analysis.
Mental Models
﻿Mental models are our (or the system’s) beliefs, norms, and cultural "truths." 
These are important determinants of the system’s behavior we are examining.
﻿Interventions that disregard the importance of habits and beliefs end up being costly and ineffective. 
Changes in any infrastructure without the close following of belief changes are not successful.
Feedback Loops
﻿When a system displays a consistent behavior over time, it is likely there is a mechanism at work controlling and creating that behavior. The mechanism works through what we call a feedback loop. Feedback loops either keep a stock’s level within a certain range or make it increase or decrease. No matter the feedback loop’s strength, the inflows and outflows to and from the stock are determined by the size of the stock itself.
﻿Again, the stock’s size determines the amount of increase or decrease the feedback loop generates over time. Identifying the variables and the links between them leads to the discovery of a feedback loop (or causal loop – both names are used interchangeably).
﻿There are two types of feedback loops. …The performance-over-time pattern gives a visible hint about the structure determining the behavior. 
Reinforcing processes lead to growth or decay. They are often referred to as vicious or virtuous cycles. 
Balancing processes work to stabilize the stock at a given level. The balancing process can be referred to as a goal-seeking or limiting due to a constraint.
﻿The loops can be designed to be read either clockwise or counterclockwise. All that matters is consistency and the correct order of the relationship. 
A loop can’t be reinforcing and balancing at the same time. If you can’t decide which case applies, it means the story is not yet finished. Add more variables and links to the loop story until you can determine the nature of the loop (balancing or reinforcing).
Examples


6. 

CREATING A PORTFOLIO OF OPPORTUNITIES
A FRAMEWORK FOR INNOVATION:
FINDING PROBLEMS WORTH WORKING ON
Reminder: Problem Types
Reminder: Finding Opportunities is the Key
Opportunities are found when things don’t work as they should, or need to work better than they currently do
Opportunities are, therefore, problems to be solved 
Opportunities allow us to create a different future, a future we want
But they must be researched and explored if they are to be turned into well-defined problems and thus become innovations
Creating a Portfolio of Opportunities
Now: Incremental Improvements
New: The Ansoff Matrix
The Goal: Next Opportunities
Where are the Best Opportunities?
Uncertainty: 
Demand
Technological feasibility
Risk: 
Financial
Political
Reputational
Managerial
Exercise: Creating a Portfolio of Opportunities
Choose a domain of interest
What un-defined or ill-defined problem(s) did you explore within that domain?
Show your research
Identify your best three opportunities in that domain
Show the process by which you developed these opportunities
Be explicit about the tools you used
For each opportunity, think in terms of use cases:
What is the problem?
Who has the problem?
Why do they have the problem?


7. 
WELL-DEFINED PROBLEMS


Turning opportunities into
well-defined problems
Problem Types
An Important Well-Defined Problem
What are the Follow-On Consequences?
What are the Follow-On Consequences?
Well-Defined Problems
Well-defined problems can be created from opportunities

A needs statement can be used to formulate a well-defined problem, thus making the criteria for a successful solution clear as well
Even if the circumstances are complex or complicated
Even if the solution is hard to devise and requires magical thinking
The solution can be incremental or radical
And can sometimes lead to a dramatically new product class or market

Critical: any solution must be falsifiable
Example: How to get to the Moon and Back?
On 20 July 1969, the Eagle module from Apollo 11 landed at Tranquility Base.
Hours later, at 21:56 CT (02:56 GMT), Neil Armstrong made history by becoming the first person to walk on the Moon.
Originally inspired by the US's Cold War rivalry with the Soviet Union, the mission is now remembered as an iconic moment for stargazers all over the world.
Armstrong was joined on the mission by his crewmates Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins. All three were born in 1930. Aldrin and Collins are still alive, but Armstrong died in 2012 at the age of 82.
Michael Collins, the third crew member, told Fox News that it's "not very often" he thinks about the mission.
"I lead a quiet life," he said. "I'll be walking along down my street at night, when it's starting to get dark, and I sense something over my right shoulder - and I look up and see that little silver sliver up there and think, 'Oh, that's the Moon! I've been there!'"


Example: How to Prevent Skidding: Anti-Lock Brakes
Stopping a car in a hurry on a slippery road can be very challenging. Anti-lock braking systems (ABS) take a lot of the challenge out of this sometimes nerve-wracking event. In fact, on slippery surfaces, even professional drivers can't stop as quickly without ABS as an average driver can with ABS.
The theory behind anti-lock brakes is simple. A skidding wheel(where the tire contact patch is sliding relative to the road) has less traction than a non-skidding wheel. If you have been stuck on ice, you know that if your wheels are spinning you have no traction. This is because the contact patch is sliding relative to the ice. By keeping the wheels from skidding while you slow down, anti-lock brakes benefit you in two ways: You'll stop faster, and you'll be able to steer while you stop.
Example: How Can Patient Compliance be Improved?
Example: How Can MLB Regain its Popularity?
While baseball started out as “America’s pastime,” in recent years the sport has really dropped off in popularity. Why this has been the case can be attributed to many factors. Below is a noncomprehensive list:
Younger generations with a smaller attention span
Lots of idle time between plays
Decline of great offensive eras (many games are low-scoring and pitcher dominated)
Less of a global audience
Fairly predictable
Changes can come on many levels, be it changing the rules to changing how the game is marketed. And indeed, change is needed for this once-glorious sport. Otherwise, MLB could be facing steeply declining revenues and dwindling relevance within broader American pop culture. 
Develop a Good Problem Statement
… from Nobel Laureate Herb Simon: “Solving a problem simply means representing it so as to make the solution transparent.”

Getting a crystal‐clear definition of the problem you are solving is the critical starting point to bulletproof problem solving. You need to be clear about the boundaries of the problem, the criteria for success, the time frame, or level of accuracy required.
Good problem statements have a number of characteristics. They are: 
Outcomes focused: A clear statement of the problem to be solved, expressed in outcomes, not activities or intermediate outputs. 
Specific and measurable wherever possible. 
Clearly time‐bound. Designed to explicitly address decision‐maker values and boundaries, including the accuracy needed and the scale of aspirations. 
Structured to allow sufficient scope for creativity and unexpected results—too narrowly scoped problems can artificially constrain solutions. 
Solved at the highest level possible, meaning for the organization as a whole, not just optimized for a part or a partial solution.

You Have a Well-Defined Problem When…
You have a clear statement of 
The use case(s)
The user(s)
Why the user(s) has/have the problem
What a solution needs to deliver:
Pains relieved
Gains achieved
As well as (if possible):
The time to deliver it
The cost to deliver it
The Process
For the opportunity you have chosen, conduct both primary and secondary research
Create a mind map to organize everything you know about the space
Define the problem in terms of what the solution needs to deliver:
Pains relieved
Gains achieved
Use as necessary, use issue trees and MECE to disaggregate the problem and identify root causes
Create a clear problem statement or jobs-to-be-done statement
Validate 
Iterate, until it is “right”
ORGANIZING YOUR THOUGHTS: MIND MAPPING
Michael J. Gelb
How to Think like Leonardo da Vinci
(Delta Trade Paperbacks: 2004)

Mind Mapping
A mind map is a diagram used to represent words, ideas, tasks, or other items linked to and arranged radially around a central key word or idea. Mind maps are used to generate, visualize, structure, and classify ideas, and as an aid in study, organization, problem solving, decision making, and writing.
The elements of a given mind map are arranged intuitively according to the importance of the concepts, and are classified into groupings, branches, or areas, with the goal of representing semantic or other connections between portions of information. Mind maps may also aid recall of existing memories.
By presenting ideas in a radial, graphical, non-linear manner, mind maps encourage a brainstorming approach to planning and organizational tasks. Though the branches of a mind map represent hierarchical tree structures, their radial arrangement disrupts the prioritizing of concepts typically associated with hierarchies presented with more linear visual cues. This orientation towards brainstorming encourages users to enumerate and connect concepts without a tendency to begin within a particular conceptual framework.
The Rules of Mind Mapping
The rules of mind mapping are “intended to help you to a free and good judgment.” They are “the children of sound experience,” having been extensively tested and refined over the past thirty years. 
All you need to begin mind mapping is a topic, a few colored pens, and a large sheet of paper. Follow these rules: 
Begin your mind map with a symbol or a picture (representing your topic) at the center of your page. Starting at the center opens your mind to a full 360 degrees of association. Pictures and symbols are much easier to remember than words and enhance your ability to think creatively about your subject. 
Write down key words. Key words are the information-rich “nuggets” of recall and creative association. 
Connect the key words with lines radiating from your central image. By linking words with lines (“branches”), you’ll show clearly how one key word relates to another. 
Print your key words. Printing is easier to read and remember than writing. 
Print one key word per line. By doing this, you free yourself to discover the maximum number of creative associations for each key word. The discipline of one word per line also trains you to focus on the most appropriate key word, enhancing the precision of your thought and minimizing clutter. 
Print your key words on the lines and make the length of the word the same as the line it is on. This maximizes clarity of association and encourages economy of space. 
Use colors, pictures, dimension, and codes for greater association and emphasis. Highlight important points and illustrate relationships between different branches of your mind map. You might, for instance, prioritize your main points through color coding, highlighting in yellow the most important points, using blue for secondary points, and so forth. Pictures and images, preferably in vivid color, should be used wherever possible; they stimulate your creative association and greatly enhance your memory. 

Step 1
Let’s say that the topic for this mind map is the Renaissance. 
Start your mind map by drawing a representative image in the middle of the paper. 
Draw it as vividly as you can, using more than one color. 
Have fun and don’t worry about the accuracy of your drawing. 

Step 2
Now print key words or draw images on lines radiating out from your central image.
Remember print on the lines, one key word or image per line, and keep the lines connected.

Step 3
When you feel you have generated enough material through free association, look at the result: all your ideas spread across one page. 
As you examine your mind map, you will see relationships that help you organize and integrate your ideas. 
Look for words that appear repeatedly throughout map. They often suggest major themes. 

Step 4
Connect related parts of your mind map with arrows, codes, and colors. 
Eliminate elements that seem extraneous. Pare your mind map down to just the ideas you need for your purpose. 
Then put them in sequence, if necessary. This can be accomplished with numbers or by redrawing the mind map in clockwise order. 

How Do You Know When You Are Finished?
Theoretically, a mind map never ends. As Da Vinci emphasized, “Everything is connected to everything else.” 
If you had the time, energy, inclination, enough colored pens, and a big enough piece of paper, you could go on linking all your knowledge and ultimately all human knowledge. 
Of course, if you are planning a speech or studying for an examination, you probably don’t have time to link all human knowledge. 
The simple answer is that your mind map is finished when the information you have generated meets your objectives for the task at hand. 

Mind Mapping in XMind

Exercise
Construct a mind map for the future of
Higher education
Medical care
Personal mobility
Reducing trash
Food
A Mars colony
Your idea
How can a mind map help you?

DEVELOPING A WELL-DEFINED PROBLEM
Charles Conn and Robert McLean Bulletproof Problem Solving: The One Skill That Changes Everything
(Wiley: 2018)

The Key to Solving Any Problem
McKinsey’s Seven Steps:
Define the problem
Disaggregate the problem
Prioritize
Develop the workplan
Gather and analyze the data
Synthesize the findings
Communicate the findings in a compelling story
MECE: AN INTRODUCTION


Defining MECE
MECE is a list.  It is a list of qualities lists should have.  [MECE] says that when data from a category is desired to be broken into subcategories, the choice of subcategories should be
collectively exhaustive — i.e., the set of all subcategories, taken together, should fully characterize the larger category of which the data are part (“no gaps”)
mutually exclusive — i.e., no subcategory should represent any other subcategory (“no overlaps”)
This is desirable for the purpose of analysis: mutual exclusivity avoids the risk of double counting information, and collective exhaustion avoids the risk of overlooking information. In plain English, MECE says that a list should have
No overlaps
No gaps
MECE
Mutually Exclusive: The branches of the tree don't overlap, or contain partial elements of the same factor or component. This is a little hard to get your head around, but it means that the core concept of each trunk or branch of the problem is self‐contained, not spread across several branches. 
Collectively Exhaustive:  Taken as a whole, your tree contains all of the elements of the problem, not just some of them. If you are missing parts, you may very well miss the solution to your problem.

Issue Trees and Logic Trees
Two areas for MECE thinking are in 
logic trees and 
issue trees.

Logic trees help you identify components of a problem. Start at the 20,000 foot view and move progressively downward. You may want to build multiple trees, for instance by business unit (organizational hierarchy) and functionally (production, sales, marketing, etc.) to see which leads you to the next step, the hypothesis.
Issue trees let you rigorously test the hypothesis. They are different from logic trees. Logic trees are a hierarchical grouping of elements. Issue trees are the series of questions or issues that must be addressed to support or disprove a hypothesis. It becomes your roadmap for analysis.

Why Use Issue Trees?
To break a problem into component parts
To ensure integrity of the problem solving is maintained
To build a common understanding within the team of the problem-solving framework
To help focus team efforts
Structure of an Issue Tree
Try This Example
Solution
Summary: Doing MECE
Break a problem down into smaller pieces that can serve as hypotheses to be tested
Small pieces cannot overlap
Sum of small parts must equal the big group
Small elements must parallel each other, i.e. they must be in the same class or category
Stick to the magical three

For example:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdzH3Dfn8_g
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Io4RcT38D2M 
The 80/20 RULE


To Find Competitive Advantage
The Pareto Principle (also known as the “80/20 Rule” or the “Law of the Vital Few”) states that, for many events, roughly 80% of the effects come from 20% of the causes. It results from a ‘power law’ distribution.  Examples of this principle: 
Wealth: The top 20% of the population own more than 80% of the nation's wealth.
Science: The top 20% of published papers account for more than 80% of all cited works in subsequent publications.
Computing: Fixing the top 20% of the most-reported bugs eliminates 80% of errors and crashes in a given system.
Entertainment: The top 20% of titles make up more than 80% of viewers/listeners.
80/20 Rule Thinking
“80/20” Thinking is Counterintuitive 
We tend to expect that all causes have roughly the same consequences. Examples:

In Business: That all customers are equally valuable; that every product, every sales dollar, every geography is as good as any other. That each employee in the same category is roughly as good as the other.

In Our Lives: That each day or week or year we spend has roughly the same significance. That each of our friends and social activities have roughly the same value to us. Or, conversely, that most of our joys or frustrations are contributed roughly equally by each of them.

In Our Careers: That our classes, and concepts taught, have roughly the same value to us. That all opportunities that present themselves hold similar promise for the future.


In Problem Solving: That problems have a large number of causes, so it is not worth isolating a few causes.

Application of the 80/20 Rule
The 80/20 Principle Turns Conventional Thinking Upside Down.  Application of the principle means that we should do the following:
Promote exceptional productivity rather than raising average efforts. This has  implications for organizations (e.g., personnel decisions), business line/product development choices, as well as deciding on one’s own objectives and activities.

Be selective, not exhaustive. Strive for excellence in a few things rather than good performance in many. 

Delegate as much as possible in order to focus effort


In every sphere of importance, look for the vital few actions that will yield the great majority of returns (E.g., Warren Buffett’s 20 investment decisions).


Calm down, work less, and think more. (Be ready not to do what is expected of you.)

Do what comes naturally and you enjoy. But: Find the highest value domain in which to do it. (E.g.,Ronald Reagan was an actor that applied his skills to government)

Good Issue Trees Meet MECE and 80/20 Rule
The Point
The point of doing 80/20 analyses is again to focus your analytical effort on the most important factors.
Example: Solving the Problem of Medication Errors
A medication error is a failure in the treatment process that leads to, or has the potential to lead to, harm to the patient. 
Per the NIH, recent studies of medical errors have estimated errors may account for as many as 251,000 deaths annually in the United States, making medical errors the third leading cause of death. 
Error rates are significantly higher in the U.S. than in other developed countries such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Germany and the United Kingdom. At the same time less than 10 percent of medical errors are reported. 
Example: Medication Errors
Per the WHO, there is no consensus about the definition of a medication error. A systematic literature review found 26 different terminologies employed for a medication error.
Medication errors can occur in 
deciding which medicine and dosage regimen to use (prescribing faults—irrational, inappropriate, and ineffective prescribing, underprescribing, overprescribing); 
writing the prescription (prescription errors); manufacturing the formulation (wrong strength, contaminants or adulterants, wrong or misleading packaging); 
dispensing the formulation (wrong drug, wrong formulation, wrong label); 
administering or taking the medicine (wrong dose, wrong route, wrong frequency, wrong duration); monitoring therapy (failing to alter therapy when required, erroneous alteration). 
They can be classified, using a psychological classification of errors, as knowledge-, rule-, action- and memory-based errors. 
Although medication errors can occasionally be serious, they are not commonly so and are often trivial. However, it is important to detect them, since system failures that result in minor errors can later lead to serious errors.
Class Exercise
Prepare an issue tree for
How can consumers reduce food waste
A problem you are currently working on
Your choice?
Apply the 80/20 Rule – what must any solution actually accomplish?
Exercise
Cover slide
What is the problem you want to address? 
Disaggregate the problem: 
Create an issue tree (use your mind map)
Use MECE to structure the issue tree
Apply the 80/20 Rule to identify the most important issues to solve
ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS



Finding the Root Cause: The Five Why’s
The vehicle did not start. (the problem)
Why? - The battery is dead. (First why)
Why? - The alternator is not functioning. (Second why)
Why? - The alternator belt has broken. (Third why)
Why? - The alternator belt was well beyond its useful service life and not replaced. (Fourth why)
Why? - The vehicle was not maintained according to the recommended service schedule. (Fifth why, a root cause)
The questioning for this example could be taken further to a sixth, seventh, or higher level, but five iterations of asking why is generally sufficient to get to a root cause. The key is to encourage the trouble-shooter to avoid assumptions and logic traps and instead trace the chain of causality in direct increments from the effect through any layers of abstraction to a root cause that still has some connection to the original problem. Note that, in this example, the fifth why suggests a broken process or an alterable behaviour, which is indicative of reaching the root-cause level.
It is interesting to note that the last answer points to a process. This is one of the most important aspects in the 5 Why approach - the real root cause should point toward a process that is not working well or does not exist. Untrained facilitators will often observe that answers seem to point towards classical answers such as not enough time, not enough investments, or not enough manpower. These answers may be true, but they are out of our control. Therefore, instead of asking the question why?, ask why did the process fail?
You will have identified the root cause when asking "why" yields no further useful information. 

Finding the Root Cause: The Five W’s
The 5 W’s:
What happened?
Who was involved?
Where did it take place?
When did it take place?
Why did that happen?
(How did that happen?)

Commonly used for information gathering and for setting the stage in order to find the root cause of (i.e. define) the problem.
Finding the Root Cause: Fishbone Diagrams
Causes in the diagram are often based around a certain category such as the 6 M's, 8 P's or 4 S's described below. Cause-and-effect diagrams can reveal key relationship among various variables and possible causes provide additional insight into process behavior.

Causes in a typical diagram are normally arranged into categories, the main ones of which are:
The 5 M's:
Machine, Method, Materials, Measurement, Man and Mother Nature
The 8 P's:
Price, Promotion, People, Processes, Place / Plant, Policies, Procedures & Product (or Service)
The 4 S's:
Surroundings, Suppliers, Systems, Skills
Exercise
Find the root cause of…
why tires go flat.
why elderly people mix up medicines.
why buses never come on time.
poor patient compliance.
never being able to find anything good to read.
never being able to find anything good to watch on TV.
any problem you can think of.
Exercise
Disaggregate a problem by building an issue tree:
How can MLB regain its popularity?
How can patient compliance be improved?
How can our physical infrastructure be made more resilient? 
How can the Toyota Prius regain market share?
How can fake meat replace real meat?
How can STEM teaching be improved?
How can phishing attacks be stopped?
How can satellites be secured from attack?
How can we leverage computational power?
How can air travel be made safe with regard to communicable diseases?
How can mRNA vaccines be better distributed?
How can medical expertise be made more available in remote areas?
How can a Mars colony get medical supplies?
Any problem of your choosing?
What is the root cause?

THE GOAL: FORMULATING A WELL-DEFINED PROBLEM

Reminder: Creating a Well-Defined Problem
Define the problem by disaggregating the problem:
Conduct primary research
Conduct secondary research
Organize data on a Mind Map
Build issue trees 
Use MECE
Determine solution criteria, i.e. what the solution needs to deliver:
Pains relieved
Gains achieved
Validate
Iterate
Until you have a clear problem or jobs-to-be-done statement
Deliverable: A Well-Defined Problem
Cover slide
What is the opportunity you want to address? 
Background   
Describe the market space. Show your research.
What are the relevant near- and long-term trends that make this space interesting?
Include mind maps, process maps, and issue trees as appropriate
Why is this opportunity worth addressing?  Think in terms of use cases:
What is the problem? 
Who has the problem? 
Why do they have the problem (i.e., what are the root causes of the problem)?
What is the well-defined problem you want to solve
Think in terms of a job-to-be-done statement (see appendix)?
What must the solution deliver?  E.g., pains relieved and/or gains achieved?
EXAMPLE: JOBS TO BE DONE 
STATEMENTS
Anthony Ulwick
What Customers Want 
(McGraw-Hill: 2005)

Jobs to be Done: Theory to Practice  
(IDEA BITE PRESS: Kindle Edition)
Example
An outcome statement must at a minimum contain a direction of improvement, a unit of measure to indicate what must be measured and controlled to improve the level of satisfaction and an object of control. Optionally, an outcome statement may contain a contextual clarifier to describe the conditions or circumstances under which the outcome needs to be achieved and examples that clarify, when needed, the object of control. 
The statement is structured such that the requirement’s satisfaction is measurable. If it can be measured, it can be controlled. When it comes to getting a job done better, a company must be able to quantify the degree to which customer satisfaction is being improved by a new or improved product or service concept. This makes it possible to act on the requirement. 
To limit variability from statement to statement, we suggest that each statement begin with either the word “minimize” or “increase.” 


Summary: Mapping Outcomes
With the core functional job defined, the next step is to create a “job map” for that job. A job map is a visual depiction of the core functional job, deconstructed into its discrete process or job steps, which explains in detail exactly what the customer is trying to get done. 
A job map does not show what the customer is doing (a solution view); rather, it describes what the customer is trying to get done (a needs view).
﻿
A desired outcome statement includes a direction of improvement, a performance metric (usually time or likelihood), an object of control (the desired outcome), and a contextual clarifier (describing the context in which the outcome is desired). “Minimize the likelihood that the music sounds distorted when played at high volume” is one example of an outcome statement related to the job of listening to music. When creating a desired outcome statement, remember the following structure: Outcome statement = direction of improvement + performance metric + object of control + contextual clarifier 
Desired outcome statements can be uncovered using any of the popular interviewing methods, such as personal interviews, focus groups, or observational or ethnographic interviews. 
While most qualitative research has a short shelf life, a complete set of desired outcome statements is an important company asset for years to come as desired outcomes don’t change over time—the solutions that address them do. With a complete set of desired outcome statements in hand, a company can gain quantitative insights into its market

In summary: To fill in the customer value model, managers must capture the customers' desired outcomes in a precise format for each stage of the job so development and marketing staffers can use the information throughout the subsequent stages of the innovation process. 
Desired outcomes typically state a direction of improvement (minimize or increase); contain a unit of measure ﻿(number, time, frequency, likelihood); and state what outcome is desired.

Examples of Job Statements
Desired outcomes typically state a direction of improvement (minimize or increase); contain a unit of measure ﻿(number, time, frequency, likelihood); and state what outcome is desired.

Obstetricians (subject) need to increase (modifier) the use of folic acid before and during pregnancy to reduce the incidence of neural tube defects (desired outcome) by xx% (vector of measurement).
Surgeons need to more accurately navigate instruments around vascular structures in order to eliminate catastrophic hemorrhaging.
Local governments need to increase access to healthful foods to reduce the incidence of metabolic syndrome.
Listeners want to minimize the time it takes to get the songs in the desired order for listening.
Listeners want to minimize the likelihood that the music sounds distorted at high volume. 
Exercise
Describe the job you want to do
Research the space
Prepare a mind map
Complemented by
Stakeholder analysis – adversary, ally, neutral (hard opposition, soft opposition, hard support, soft support)
Competitor analysis – direct and indirect; current and potential
Create a jobs statement (i.e., a needs statement):
A subject  (normally stakeholder e.g. nurse, clinician, hospitals)
An action verb  (e.g. prepare, collect, insert)
A desired outcome  (e.g. reduce patient discomfort)
A vector of measurement  (e.g. minimize time)
(sometimes) context (e.g. caused by…, in order to…)


APPENDIX:
BRAINSTORMING SOLUTIONS

THE BABSON MODEL AND MAGICAL THINKING
The Value of Magical Thinking
The idea is to place ideas developed from user inquiries in the three circles, develop relationships among them ideas, build related solutions that cross all three circles, and settle on one “stretch” solution that can be taken back to users for further development.
IDEO’s Deep Dive


The Art of Innovation
Thomas Kelley with Jonathan Littman (Doubleday: 2001)
The Deep Dive
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M66ZU2PCIcM 
The Methodology
"When you’re stuck with a tough decision or a problem you don’t understand, talk to all the smart people you know." It’s the networking approach to problem solving….we have a well-developed and continuously refined methodology; 
Understand the market, the client, the technology, and the perceived constraints on the problem. Later in a project, we often challenge those constraints, but it’s important to understand current perceptions. 
Observe real people in real-life situations to find out what makes them tick: what confuses them, what they like, what they hate, where they have latent needs not addressed by current products and services
Visualize new-to-the-world concepts and the customers who will use them. Some people think of this step as predicting the future, and it is probably the most brainstorming-intensive phase of the process. Quite often, the visualization takes the form of a computer-based rendering or simulation, though IDEO also builds thousands of physical models and prototypes every year. For new product categories we sometimes visualize the customer experience by using composite characters and storyboard-illustrated scenarios. In some cases, we even make a video that portrays life with the future product before it really exists. 
Evaluate and refine the prototypes in a series of quick iterations. We try not to get too attached to the first few prototypes, because we know they’ll change. No idea is so good that it can’t be improved upon, and we plan on a series of improvements. We get input from our internal team, from the client team, from knowledgeable people not directly involved with the project, and from people who make up the target market. We watch for what works and what doesn’t, what confuses people, what they seem to like, and we incrementally improve the product in the next round. 
Implement the new concept for commercialization. This phase is often the longest and most technically challenging in the development process, but I believe that IDEO’s ability to successfully implement lends credibility to all the creative work that goes before. 

Seven Secrets for Better Brainstorming
SHARPEN THE FOCUS  Good brainstormers start with a well-honed statement of the problem…. Go for something tangible that participants can sink their teeth into, without limiting the possible solutions. We’ve also found that the best topic statements focus outward on a specific customer need or service enhancement rather than focusing inward on some organizational goal. 
PLAYFUL RULES  Don’t start to critique or debate ideas. 
NUMBER YOUR IDEAS  We’ve found that a hundred ideas per hour usually indicates a good, fluid brainstorming session. 
BUILD AND JUMP  Try building on an idea. Encourage another push or introduce a small variation. Or take a jump, either back to an earlier path you skipped by too quickly or forward to a completely new approach. Whatever you do, try to get into the next power curve and keep the energy up,
THE SPACE REMEMBERS  Great brainstorm leaders understand the power of spatial memory. Write the flow of ideas down in a medium visible to the whole group. 
STRETCH YOUR MENTAL MUSCLES  One type of warm-up we practice is a fast-paced word game simply to clear the mind…. Another warm-up is to do some content-related homework. 
GET PHYSICAL  Good brainstorms are extremely visual. They include sketching, mind mapping, diagrams, and stick figures. 
SYSTEMATIC INVENTIVE THINKING
DREW BOYD AND JACOB GOLDENBERG
THINKING INSIDE THE BOX
(SIMON & SCHUSTER: 2013)

Thinking Inside the Box
The traditional view of creativity is that it is unstructured and doesn’t follow rules or patterns. That you need to think “outside the box” to be truly original and innovative. That you should start with a problem and then “brainstorm” ideas without restraint until you find a solution. That you should “go wild” making analogies to things that have nothing to do with your products, services, or processes. That straying as far afield as possible will help you come up with a breakthrough idea. We believe just the opposite. We’ll show you that more innovation— and better and quicker innovation— happens when you work inside your familiar world (yes, inside the box) using what we call templates. …the majority of new, inventive, and successful products result from only five templates: 
subtraction, 
division, 
multiplication, 
task unification, and 
attribute dependency. 
These templates form the basis of the innovation method called Systematic Inventive Thinking (SIT). 

The Five Templates
SUBTRACTION.  Innovative products and services often have had something removed, usually something that was previously thought to be essential to the product or service. 
DIVISION.  Many creative products and services have had a component divided out of them and placed somewhere else in the usage situation, usually in a way that initially seemed unproductive or unworkable. 
MULTIPLICATION.  With this technique, a component has been copied but changed in some way, usually in a way that initially seemed unnecessary or odd. 
TASK UNIFICATION.  With some creative products and services, certain tasks have been brought together and unified within one component of the product or service— usually a component that was previously thought to be unrelated to that task. 
ATTRIBUTE DEPENDENCY.  In many innovative products and services, two or more attributes that previously seemed unrelated now correlate with one another. As one thing changes, something else changes.

Using these techniques correctly relies on two key principles. The first is called the “Closed World” principle. We’ve actually introduced it to you already: the notion that the best and fastest way to innovate is to look at resources close at hand. 
The second principle requires retraining how your brain thinks about problem solving. Most people assume that the way to innovate is to start with a well-defined problem and then try to think of solutions. In our method, it is just the opposite. We start with an abstract, conceptual solution and then work back to the problem that it solves. Therefore, we have to learn how to reverse the usual way our brain works when innovating. 

The Closed World
We believe that you’ll be most creative when you focus on the internal aspects of a situation or problem— and when you constrain your options rather than broaden them. By defining and then closing the boundaries of a particular creative challenge and then looking only inside these boundaries, you can be more creative more consistently than by musing about the stratosphere or, worse, waiting for the muse to descend. 
The Closed World is based on the idea that you look inward rather than outward, and that this propels you toward the virgin territory of truly creative ideas— ideas that are both original and useful. …these ideas all satisfied two conditions: 
First, they contradicted some essential belief in the prevailing wisdom about the right way to do things. 
Second, all the solutions were contained in a relatively small space surrounding the problem. …the Closed World of the problem.
…our Closed World principle says that the further you go from the problem, the less creative you will be. 
Which brings us to another important point: the purpose of the Closed World is to teach creativity first and foremost. It’s not to always come up with the best solution to a problem at hand. Sometimes the best solution to a problem can actually be found outside the box. But if your goal is to systematize creativity, you have to operate within the confines of the Closed World. That is key. 
…by limiting the number of variables under consideration from infinity to a finite number, we amplify our potential to come up with a creative solution. Why? Such limits boost the creative process, allowing individuals to be more focused. 
Perhaps when people eliminate resources and pare down their problem world to its basic elements, they tap into their own natural resourcefulness. Creativity is really about an intelligent search among a limited list of possibilities, rather than random, long-distance outward leaps and bounds. This, then, is our first rule: look inside! 
Webinars
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HAZZ5Aleuag 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P6LKoEr97M4 


8. 
CONCLUSION OF THE TERM


Problem, solution, business case
ARINC’s Model
For the opportunity you have selected:
Is it real?
Can we win?
What are the Resources required to win?  Are they available or can they be obtained?
What are the Risks associated with the project or business?  Can they be managed?
Is it worth it?
What is the Return expected and why?  Does it warrant our attention?
Peter Thiel’s View
Under perfect competition, in the long run no company makes an economic profit. The opposite of perfect competition is monopoly. Whereas a competitive firm must sell at the market price, a monopoly owns its market, so it can set its own prices. Since it has no competition, it produces at the quantity and price combination that maximizes its profits. 
…by “monopoly,” we mean the kind of company that’s so good at what it does that no other firm can offer a close substitute. Google is a good example of a company that went from 0 to 1: it hasn’t competed in search since the early 2000s, when it definitively distanced itself from Microsoft and Yahoo! 

Every monopoly is unique, but they usually share some combination of the following characteristics: proprietary technology, network effects, economies of scale, and branding.
As a good rule of thumb, proprietary technology must be at least 10 times better than its closest substitute in some important dimension to lead to a real monopolistic advantage. Anything less than an order of magnitude better will probably be perceived as a marginal improvement and will be hard to sell, especially in an already crowded market. The clearest way to make a 10x improvement is to invent something completely new. 

Every startup is small at the start. Every monopoly dominates a large share of its market. Therefore, every startup should start with a very small market. Always err on the side of starting too small. The reason is simple: it’s easier to dominate a small market than a large one. If you think your initial market might be too big, it almost certainly is.


DEVELOPING A VALUE PROPOSITION
Giving the customer a reason to buy
The Value Proposition
A business or marketing statement that summarizes why a consumer should buy a product or use a service. 
This statement should convince a potential consumer that one particular product or service will add more value or better solve a problem than other similar offerings. 
Companies use this statement to target customers who will benefit most from using the company's products, and this helps maintain an economic moat.  
The ideal value proposition is concise and appeals to the customer's strongest decision-making drivers. 

Per ARINC: A B2B Value Proposition
When defining your value proposition, if you can clearly answer the following questions in a way that is meaningful to your customer, you have gone a long way in developing a winning offer:
What do we do in helping our customers increase their revenue? 
What do we do in helping our customers decrease their costs? 

Other important questions:
What do we do to help our customers better respond to the needs of their customers, to new opportunities that might be presented by their customers, or to threats? 
What do we do to help our customers improve their productivity? 
What do we do to help our customers improve their cycle time/speed? 
What do we do to help our customers improve the satisfaction, retention, and growth of their customers? 
What do we do to help our customers improve their quality? 
What do we do to help our customers improve the satisfaction of their employees? 
The Value Proposition: Pains and Gains
Customer Jobs:  what customers are trying to get done in their work and in their lives
Gains:  the more or less expected benefits the customers are seeking
Pains:  the bad outcomes, risks, and obstacles related to customer jobs

Summary
If the problem you have defined is solved, define the value proposition:
Gains achieved
Pains relieved
The job to be done
FINAL TERM REPORT


Deliverable: Problem, Solution, Business Case
Cover slide
What is the opportunity you want to address? 
Background   
Describe the market space. Show your research.
What are the relevant near- and long-term trends that make this space interesting?
Include mind maps, process maps, and issue trees as appropriate
Why is this opportunity worth addressing?  Think in terms of use cases:
What is the problem? 
Who has the problem? 
Why do they have the problem (i.e., what are the root causes of the problem)?
What is the well-defined problem you want to solve
Think in terms of a job-to-be-done statement (see appendix)?
What must the solution deliver?  E.g., pains relieved and/or gains achieved?
Does the basic business case make sense?
Complete the template for the Mullins Model (backed by research and validation)

The Mullins Model:
Thinking Small and Big at the Same Time
Target Segment
Define the initial target market segment
Who (and how many)
What are the relevant demographics or psycho-graphics
Where, in terms of geography
What is the value proposition to this market segment
What customer pain(s) will your business idea resolve
What gain(s) will your business idea offer
How is your idea is superior (better, faster, cheaper) enough to get customers to change what they are doing now
Market Attractiveness
Can the initial target segment lead to others? 
How large is the potential market?
number of customers
how much do they spend on this kind of product or service
how fast has the market grown, and will it continue to grow
Think in terms of market size and market growth
Industry Attractiveness
What exactly are you competing against in terms of
Products and/or services
Companies 
Think in terms of volume and market share 
How large or well-resourced are these companies?
Be specific

Competitive Advantage
What is your competitive advantage (i.e. something different from that offered by existing products and services) that
delivers greater value to customers
and/or comparable value at lower cost
or enters a niche market where there is no competition
How difficult will this advantage be to copy?
Is your idea scalable?
Validation
How have you validated 
That this problem is real, i.e. that the initial target market cares
That your solution is superior to alternatives
What secondary and primary research have you done?
To whom have you spoken?
With whom will you need to speak?


9
JANUARY TERM


VALIDATING PROBLEM
DEFINING THE SOLUTION
From Opportunity to Well-Defined Problem
What is the problem?
Who has the problem?
Why do they have the problem?
What does the solution need to deliver?
How feasible is the solution?
What will be the impact of solving the problem?
Round 1: Summary of Idea
Problem/Solution
What is the Problem Worth Solving?
Who is the Target Customer?
What is the Proposed Solution?

Video Pitch (not yet)
Round 2: Business Plan
Introduction
What is the background of the problem?
Describe any relevant history (how the problem came about) and how the problem impacts relevant stakeholders. 
What are the relevant macro and market trends that impact the problem?
Describe the relevant macro trends (e.g., political, regulatory, technological, demographic, etc.) that make this problem worth solving.  In other words, what is changing in the world that has given rise to this opportunity?

Round 2: Business Plan
Customer and Market Analysis
What is the specific problem your company solves?
Provide details.
Who has this problem?  What is the initial target market?
Describe the relevant market segments and how you arrived at the initial target market.  Describe the relevant customer profile.  How large is this initial target segment?
How have you validated that the problem is real and that customers care?
Describe who have you spoken to and what they have said.  What validation do you have that current solutions are inadequate and that customers care deeply about this problem?

Round 2: Business Plan
Solution
What is your proposed solution?
Describe your core technological and/or market insights.  Use diagrams, sketches, and flowcharts as necessary.  
Why is your solution superior to alternatives?
Describe your solution’s competitive advantages vis a vis the major direct and indirect competitors.  Elaborate on the value proposition being offered to the initial target market and other relevant stakeholders.

BUSINESS MODEL CANVASES
What is Your Workplan?
The Business Model Canvas
The Business Model Canvas
Business Model Canvas: Questions





Lecture notes: 
INTRODUCTION
Introduce myself
This is a course about innovation; and our goal is to teach you how to do innovation 
Suppose you hated your boss and never wanted to work in corporate America again, what would you do?
Look for a new job? – always a possibility
Go back to school? – we love that idea
Or try something on your own?
Getting Started
So what is the next big thing in …?
You have 10 minutes
Review results
Why are most of your ideas useless – because they are unrelated to actual problems out there
Real innovation begins with real problems, problems worth solving, because not all problems are created equal
What I am really concerned with here is the process – how to bring innovation under analytical control, and get beyond just brainstorming in the local café 
Summary
To summarize, this is a class about innovation; and how to turn innovation into a structured process
Innovation is about finding problems worth solving, problems that are important to you, and then turning them into opportunities
Opportunities which can then be turned into new products and services that can actually be built and delivered to the market
The key paths to finding problems worth solving are 
One, to think differently about the future and the problems that might be found there;
Two, to exploit change;
Three, to challenge existing assumptions and paradigms;
And four, to explore market and technological uncertainty.
Important, we are not talking about solutions here, i.e. the new products and services that could be delivered to the market, only about the problems worth working on
Solutions we will deal with next term
This remainder of the slide deck contains an introduction to the methodology that we have developed at Johns Hopkins and that we will use here in class
There is no textbook; these slides will function as your textbook and they have been so structured as to act as a resource for you
In other words, they are not typical corporate slides
I apologize up front that this slide deck is dominated by lecture as we lay out the theoretical framework for what we will be doing here
I promise that after this, we will do mostly exercises and discussion


So let’s go down that path and get warmed up with an exercise – e-commerce
CHANGE SLIDE
Its origins are in the 1970s, and now of course it is ubiquitous
CHANGE SLIDE
Both China and the US have massive online markets and they are only getting larger
Did Covid increase the share of e-commerce as a percentage of retail sales? - yes, and it is not likely to decrease, as anyone who has seen all the empty malls in America knows
Method 1: Trend Analysis
One of the most important ways of finding problems worth solving is to learn how to think differently about the future.  Here are two techniques.  We will introduce them briefly today.
One technique is trend analysis. i.e. carrying a trend to its absurd conclusion and then seeing what you find
So you could have asked, what if there is no retail at all?  What will cities look like and what kinds of problems will we find that we can start working on today?
What will be missing?
What products and services and policies will be needed?
One of the hardest things that we face is trying to imagine a future that will look different from today.
And one of the major reasons why successful companies eventually fail
They keep innovating for yesterday’s market
Method 2: Scenario Analysis
The second technique for re-imagining the future is what is called scenario analysis
This is where we create four alternative futures – think of them as stories or science fiction
The key is to figure out what the axes are
There is no formula or rule here – whatever seems to work
And once you have your boxes, they can then be analyzed for what products and services will be needed in that future
Scenario Analysis: E-Commerce
These were the two axes chosen by my colleague Sascha
He then created stories in the four boxes, accompanied by pictures
CHANGE SLIDE
And then he filled out the stories
Each represents an alternative future that presents different challenges, uncertainties, and problems; and thus opportunities
Scenarios give you a chance to ask
How will life be different in such a future?
How will people live and what new products and services will they need?
Method 3: The Next Big Thing
Another technique we will look at is to think through what is the next big thing inherent in the situation, whether the macro-changes occurring out there in the world, the user experience, or the industry space
All these techniques are different ways of challenging assumptions, asking what’s changing, and asking what’s missing
INTRODUCTION (contd.)
Why Innovate?
Back to our subject, why do you want to be an innovator – because you hate your boss, or you want to be the boss; and because you can’t stand doing the same thing over and over 
Because nobody will pay you what you want to earn just to keep doing what was done well enough yesterday
But why do companies and organizations need to innovate
Markets Mature
First, markets mature; we want new and different and are never content with what we have inherited
CHANGE SLIDE
Second, to find competitive advantage
CHANGE SLIDE
Third, to exploit change
This is the key
In my opinion, change is the real driver here
How change destroys what we are doing now and how we in turn exploit change
How discontinuities take us by surprise and change everything; how we in turn create and exploit discontinuities 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Fourth, because innovation is the key to entrepreneurship, i.e. starting new businesses
How many of you want to be entrepreneurs?  Why?
How I became an entrepreneur
Entrepreneurs, almost by definition, innovate. 
Innovation is the specific instrument of entrepreneurship. 
It is the act that endows resources with a new capacity to create wealth. 
Principles: Finding the Best Opportunities
According to Peter Drucker, entrepreneurship is about purposeful, systematic innovation and begins with the hunt for opportunities. 
Opportunities are problems in disguise
And that is what we will do here – a purposeful, systematic hunt for opportunities

Components of Innovation
All innovation requires three things:
A problem worth working on
A solution that solves the problem
And a business case that allows the solution to keep going, to scale, and to become sustainable
All three must be there and all three must be validated
So where should you begin?
The reality is that innovators can really begin with any of them, but in the end all of them must be there
But we will focus primarily on the first part, finding problems worth solving because we think it is the most fruitful, especially in a classroom setting
So what is a problem – very simply, something that does not work as it should.
Our specific task here is to find the best opportunities to study and explore; because the best opportunities make for the most interesting and impactful problems to solve, and possibly change the world
In short, Problem First
And the Best Problems Are…
So what are the best problems – you tell me
Those that are seriously impeding our progress
Those that give us the ability to create a different future in an uncertain world
Our goal here is to learn how to find the best problems in a structured way using a broad set of tools, techniques, and templates
Traditional Answer: Getting Out of the Building
So where do you find good problems?
The newspaper?
Your mother?
The usual answer is by getting out of the building and talking to real people out there struggling with real problems– i.e. customers and employees
Over 15 years ago, I was part of the team that created the Center for Bio-Innovation and Design, CBID, at Hopkins
It was part of the Bio-Medical Engineering Department (BME), which was itself a joint venture between Engineering and Medicine, and was a rather unique program at its inception
The idea was to create a graduate level version of the famous undergraduate BME design teams 
Undergraduate design teams worked on projects as presented by Hopkins medical faculty, and all the innovation work was in developing a solution
By contrast, the idea was that graduate teams would find their own original, innovative projects, which meant starting with finding the right problem
Students arrived at the beginning of June and then spent the summer observing physicians and surgeons in order to find the next big thing to work on
Example: Getting Out of the Building
We used a variety of formats, some extensive and some intensive, but they all came down to the same basic idea – get out of the building, go hang out in the Hopkins Hospital, and go see what real people were really struggling with
In addition to these kinds of structured observations, students heard from experts and lead users
The goal was, over the summer, build a bank of ideas, hundreds of ideas, and then pick from the best ones to form teams that would actually build out the solution and develop the business case
On the slide is an example of what you can do when you talk to people
The Challenge of Presentism
But this is not the only source of problems worth working on, and this is what has been missed in the literature to date
As important as it is to get out of the building, it is even more important to get out of your own head
A critical element here is time and the flow of time
Problems are found at different boundaries of uncertainty
The short, medium, and long terms
The question is what problems will you find when you get to the medium and long terms
They are not so easily discovered by getting out of the building
The ones we just saw in those old photos were all immediate and critical problems – it was the solutions that were hard
When you get out of the building, all you find are present problems, the problems people are struggling with right now
What is the Problem Here?
So how about this one?
Marconi invented wireless telegraphy in order to send messages where there were no wires; for example from shore to ship
He solved a well-defined problem
But what did he really create – a mechanism to send messages to nobody in particular and to then sell them stuff
How would you have discovered that problem by talking to people?  Was it even a problem in any normal sense of the word?
Getting out of the building is important, but more important is to get out of your own head and your usual ways of thinking.  
What is the old joke about Ford – “If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said a faster horse.” – probably apocryphal
Or what was the problem the telephone solved – it was not simply a more efficient telegraph – it was a machine for gossiping with your neighbors
How do you get out of your own head?  By making yourself smarter.  
How?  By reading books and by talking to people who can challenge you.
Jonathan Haidt and why Americans are so stupid now
That is what this course is about – helping you get out of your head
Or Here?
Marconi is an old example and the outcome seems obvious now
He had a great solution, for which people found an even better problem to solve
Most inventions start off this way – attempting to solve a well-defined problem
This is a solution first approach to innovation
The question is how to find other, possibly better problems to solve
Our process can help here as well
Take a look at this very modern technology – Delta’s Parallel Reality
The technology solves an interesting well-defined problem
Very cool, but is there a bigger problem it could help solve?
How would you figure this out? – that is the question, and the purpose of our course
The answer lies in making this problem less well-defined, in un-constraining it, turning it into an ill-defined problem
GPT-3: Where is the Problem Worth Solving?
Generative AI – an amazing technology that in the blink of an eye has changed everything
Why is so much money flowing into AI right now? – because we do not know how it will all turn out
So what are the best problems to solve with Generative AI? – this is what people all over the world are figuring out now
Or Here?
But what about this one? – Creating art from text
Very cool, but what problem does it solve?
CHANGE SLIDES
Again the purpose of this course is to help you get out of your head and find real problems to solve, whether you start with a blank slate or whether you start with an interesting technology, a “solution”


A Structured Process for “Doing Innovation”
As a quick overview, the methodology that we have created involves two intersecting models.  
The first is a structured process, including a wide range of tools, techniques, and templates to identify problems that are worth solving across increasing horizons of uncertainty (and lengthening time-scales).  
The result of this process is the creation of a bank of ideas, possibly hundreds of opportunities that can then be evaluated, again in a structured manner, for the best ones.
How Would You Solve this Problem?
In English, the word problem is problematic because it can refer to a whole range of problems and we call all of them problems
And it is this confusion that our first model attempts to straighten out
Let me give you an example
A class was asked by NATO to design the small combat team of the future
An amazing problem to address; students loved it; they had all grown up playing video games
And yet they came up with nothing
Why? – because there is no way to think about the small combat team of the future without first thinking about the future of war
A Taxonomy of Problems
Our approach is based on the idea that there are three different kinds of problems across three different time horizons
What is possible, and what is plausible, what is probable, 
What we have called un-defined, ill-defined, and well-defined
Each kind of problem asks different kinds of questions, requires different kinds of tools, different kinds of “solutions,” and different kinds of business cases.
Examples: Different Kinds of Questions
Here are some examples, all from the world of prosthetics
Well-defined problems are problems as we normally think of them
What the solution needs to accomplish is clear, even if it is hard to do
Ill-defined problems, by contrast, ask what is the next big thing for us here, in this specific technological or market space
The “solution” is a list of opportunities because lots of things could serve as the next big thing
The goal is to create that list and then figure out what exactly to work on
And lastly, un-defined problems ask questions about what the future will look like
This is not a problem in the normal sense of the word
Rather it is a description of future states which can be explored for problems worth working on; 
Problems that help us create a list of opportunities that that can be used to prepare for, or even create, a future we want
To summarize, only well-defined problems can be solved in the traditional sense of the word because only there can the solution be falsified – it works or it doesn’t
By contrast, ill- and un-defined problems are used to create portfolios of opportunities – the distinction is critical
The problem here is that all too often we treat all problems as well-defined and use the wrong tools.
And an even bigger problem is that that the “next big thing” almost always comes from un-defined and ill-defined problems, while the funding always comes from well-defined problems
Problem Types
The point is that these three kinds of problems exist on a continuum (hence the dotted lines); and you can start anywhere
But it is not just the nature of the problems, but the relationships among them that matter as well
The reality is that you can start anywhere and move back and forth across the continuum
Just as imagining alternative futures allows us to find problems worth working on, so the solutions to important problems allow us to rethink the future
The big problem here is that we usually treat all problems as if they were well-defined, and apply the wrong tools
Un-defined and ill-defined problems cannot be solved in any traditional sense of the term
Rather, they are spaces to explore in order to build a portfolio of opportunities
The Goal: Finding Lots of Opportunities
This famous quote from Linus Pauling will be our guide here
As many good ideas as we can, across as wide a spectrum as we can, in the hope that a few of them turn out to be really good
Your best idea is rarely your first idea, and it rarely grows on a tree
Finding good ideas is hard work, and takes practice
Generating lots of ideas forces us to think broadly across domains
You need to get out of your narrow areas of specialization
It is a chance for you all to improve the flexibility and agility of your thinking in a complex and uncertain world
Opportunities Are…
So what is an opportunity?
A chance to fix something that does not work as it should
A chance or a prospect to create something
Hopefully something interesting and meaningful, possibly intriguing, almost certainly exciting; a different future
But to actually create a new future, opportunities must be turned into well-defined problems that can actually be solved
Which are the Best Opportunities? 
The obvious question now is what makes for a good opportunity
The usual answers are impact, feasibility, and personal preference
But I would argue that more important are those ideas that take you by surprise, that make you go “whoa” when you hear them
And those where any solution will take advantage of technological and market uncertainty, while minimizing risk
Risk and Uncertainty
Let me explain – take a look at this diagram
First, what is the difference between risk and uncertainty?
READ FROM SLIDE
Uncertainty is not risk
Risk is the probability of loss, injury, or other adverse outcome. It can be estimated and calculated based on our knowledge of prior outcomes and conditions. It has been mathematically formulated since the late 17th century, notably in the work of Blaise Pascal. Most importantly, it can be managed. Risk can be distributed (syndicated), insured against, hedged, and reduced. In short, it can be quantified and controlled.
Uncertainty is different. It is not subject to exact quantification. It was only recently formalized in the early 20th century work of the economist Frank Knight. It represents all of the possible future states of the world at any given time. The higher the uncertainty, the greater the number of possible outcomes, both positive and negative. It is a source of discomfort because we cannot predict it, but it is also a source of potential value. Higher uncertainty means greater potential, and most of us underestimate the extent of that potential since there are more possible future states of the world than we can possibly comprehend.
While some view the two as essentially the same and use the words interchangeably, uncertainty is quite distinct from risk, both in its character and in its use. In fact, what sets highly successful entrepreneurs and innovators apart from the rest of the population is the ability to see and use this difference as the basis for their success. The good news is that we can learn from them.
Btw, this distinction is also why most companies want to size existing markets -- if you have heard the expression "TAM" or "SAM" (total addressable market, or serviceable addressable market), these are measures of existing, known, markets, since one can numerically estimate the current size of these. My corporate clients often ask me to help them estimate these sizes.    
Entrepreneurs on the other hand discover entirely new markets -- there is no "addressable market" until they do what Drucker famously said in Innovation and Entrepreneurship, which is, to "create a customer."  Once we know there are customers for, say, hula hoops or carbonated drinks or spreadsheets, only then can we create an estimate of a TAM.
We manage risk, but exploit uncertainty
Entrepreneurs and innovators see value in uncertainty since they earn profits when gains are appreciably greater than is generally expected.
Who plays in each quadrant?  What kind of problem is being addressed in each quadrant? – use space as an example for each quadrant
Top right: governments; defense departments; where the bets are very big and nothing is clear; e.g. hypersonics, quantum computing; and once nuclear energy and space exploration (over the past two decades, over 10,000 space companies have entered what is being called “new space” (article: The new space race could turn science fiction into reality by RANA FOROOHAR)
Bottom right: big companies; local governments; where the bets are big in markets and technologies that are well-understood; e.g. battery factories; space: SpaceX, Blue Origin, ViaSat
Bottom left: company R&D departments; small inventors; the usual incremental, sustaining improvements that are necessary to maintain current products and markets – the problem here is that corporations spend way too much time researching and predicting the present
We want to build X, and we want to differentiate it from the offerings of competitors
But how do we do that if both they and us are all operating under the same assumptions? – are our assumptions about the future valid?
Space – small improvements to everything
Top left: innovators who want to create the next big thing; where there is enough uncertainty in the technology and/or market space that there is no dominant player and room for an entrepreneur
If it were obvious, everybody would see it and there would be no opportunity for innovation or above average gains
In other words, all innovation exploits uncertainty to a greater or lesser extent
Space – space debris, space medicine, space agriculture, 3D printing on the moon
We are proposing the generation and curation of a portfolio of ideas, which may exist all over the four quadrants of the Uncertainty - Risk matrix.  This is a good way for corporations and governments to think about the innovation activities they are engaged in (and perhaps to expand their portfolios -- just as sophisticated investors like to own a wide-ranging investment portfolio, including "long shots"). 
Innovation is always a matter of technological and/or market insights – seeing what others do not see
In other words, all innovation exploits uncertainty to a greater or lesser extent
Innovation can take place in any quadrant, but we will focus on the upper left
Why – because that is where there is enough uncertainty to offer big opportunities, at modest risk
But where we also have a chance to win big
Where we create exciting startups
Why – because it is a space not yet dominated by big players
In short, innovation and entrepreneurship thrive where there is uncertainty, whether technological or market
And this is what you will learn here – to explore, and take advantage, of the upper left quadrant
So here is the question – where future technologies and markets are uncertain, how do you know which are the best problems to work on?
The short answer is you don’t; rather, you place lots of small bets
Again, the idea of generating lots of ideas
And that is the goal of our program – to teach you how to be innovators in this sense of the word
And we do this in a structured manner, week by week as we practice over the course of the semester, and get better and better at being innovators
Not Design Thinking
One last thing
Our approach here is not a rehash of design thinking, which is very much a standard part of university curricula now, and not just in engineering curricula
Design thinking focuses on solving problems through user engagement, hypothesis testing, and iteration
By contrast, we want to focus on finding problems worth solving, the ideas at the start of the innovation process
Again, problem first
Not DCF/Business Case
Nor is this a rehash of business case requirements, the kinds of things you need when justifying an investment to senior management
Design thinking and DCF are appropriate tools for the bottom left quadrant
What we are have tried to do is create tools for the upper left quadrant
Not TAM SOM SAM
Another traditional MBA tool – market analysis and scoping
But how do you analyze a market that does not yet exist
The higher the uncertainty, the less you know
And yet, we always seem compelled to force our ideas into these MBA tools because this is what management expects
Summary: Innovation under Uncertainty
To summarize
We have developed at Johns Hopkins what we believe to be a unique methodology for the practice of innovation – it is a combination of two models
First, a structured approach that uses a range of tools, techniques, and templates to explore un-defined and ill-defined spaces
All with the goal of creating a portfolio of opportunities, of cool ideas, 
Which takes us to the second model, where the best of the opportunities, those that exploit uncertainty while minimizing risk, can then be turned into well-defined problems that can actually be solved
Our Work Together
This is designed to be a two-semester course
In the first term, we learn how to innovate and as a class we search for problems that are worth solving
As a class, we will build a portfolio of opportunities
We then form teams around the best ideas
And then in the spring, we build or design the solution, and develop the business case
Problem, solution, business case – those are the three pillars of the course, and the three pillars of innovation – and all must be validated
But problem first

Case Study
Let’s work through an example – this was a two-year project, and is still going on
Students explored an un-defined problem and then created an ill-defined problem from which they could build a portfolio of opportunities
The DTA was uncertain, but minimized risk
They picked one, turned it into a well-defined problem, and then proceeded to solve it
WORK THROUGH CASE STUDY
The Future is Here: Army Prepares for Dispersed Warfare with High Casualties
And the future is here
This article appeared on October 11 in Defense News
For us, this shows the power of using un-defined and ill-defined problems to get out of your head
Summary: Innovation under Uncertainty
Just to summarize again, we explore un-defined and ill-defined problems in order to build a bank of opportunities, the best of which can then be turned into well-defined opportunities that can actually be solved
This is a volume game – you cannot find a great idea without having lots of ideas
And our goal is to turn all this into a structured process


Becoming an Innovator
Fundamentally our goal is to make you all into innovators
It is what the job market expects of you
The ability to lead, to communicate, and to innovate
In other words, solve problems and create new things – products, services, ways of working, policies
Nothing else will suffice in today’s market
So what does it mean to be an innovator?
Becoming a Creative Thinker
By definition, creative thinking brings about new things – innovations 
Most of the writing about creative thinking is about finding solutions
Our approach is different – we want to direct your thinking first and foremost to finding problems worth solving, problems that you actually care about
Developing Thinking Tools
In a book you can see cited below, Root-Bernstein points out is that innovation is a way of thinking that uses tools such as you see here
Work your way down the list
It begins with being able to observe, to see things with new eyes, to see what others do not
Moves to pattern recognition and analogizing
And it ends with being able to synthesize disparate points of data and information into a new whole
Innovative thinking is creative thinking
Creative Thinking is Ordinary Thinking
Here is a another famous list put together by Robert Weisberg – the phrase “I’m thinking” can really refer to any of the activities on this list
Creative thinking, therefore, is simply a kind of ordinary thinking and can be constructed from the elements on this list
Learning to Orchestrate Cognitive Components
In other words, creativity is simply organizing these elements into some sort of order, some sort of structure that allows you to solve the problem at hand
Or for us, find the problem that is important
Gaining a Broad Perspective
Critical to the ability to put together these elements, particularly in high-uncertainty domains, is having, or gaining, a broad perspective, not narrow expertise
And how do we gain this broad perspective?
by playing in many different sand boxes and by crossing boundaries
which is what we will try to do this term
Conclusion: Becoming an Innovator
To summarize, there is an intimate connection among innovation, problem solving, and creative thinking
Per Abbott Payson Usher, innovation can be thought of as a sequence of four steps, as you see here
Our focus will be on the first step, finding problems worth solving; not just problems worth solving but the right problem for you


Seeing What Others Don’t
The question for us is how to create this portfolio of innovation
We need a framework and a toolkit
We will develop those in this class
Innovation is always about seeing what others don’t; surprise is exactly what we are looking for in innovation
There is only one world out there – why do some people see what others don’t
Example of coffee shops and Starbucks
Why is this so Hard?
According to Gary Klein, this is so hard because companies pursue the predictable, but also need to change and respond to changes and challenges.
Mintzberg – management is about both managing the status quo and about change – a difficult task to do them both well, but that is for a different class
Again, innovation is about change.  It is about seeing things differently, what we call insight.
Perfection and Predictability
Again, according to Gary Klein, the enemy of insight is predictability and checklists and routines
The Act of Insight
So the question is what sparks an insight
For Klein, insight is a way of seeing the world differently, of seeing what is changing and what could change.  
All fine and good, but how do you develop the ability to see the world differently, or are you just born that way?
The Triple Path Model
For Klein, the path to insight is the five C’s that you see here
They lead us to seeing the world differently and in unpredictable ways
Here are some detailed slides for you
Summary: Multiple Paths to Insight
Klein’s model makes sense, but still does not really answer how you develop the skills encompassed by these five C’s?
And I can think of no other answer than to practice
Innovation is a skill like any other
The more you practice, the better you get
That is what we are going to attempt to do in this course.

UN-DEFINED PROBLEMS
Problem Types
To remind everyone, innovation is about creating the new – new products, new markets, new ways of working – in order to solve problems, and the key, for you personally of course, is finding the right problems to solve
At Hopkins, we have created a model that uses three different kinds of problems, each asking different kinds of questions, requiring different kinds of answers, and using different kinds of tools
Un-defined and ill-defined problems are used to explore alternative futures and different technological and market spaces in order to build a portfolio of opportunities
We will start with un-defined problems
Un-Defined Problems
These are not problems in the traditional sense of the term, but ask what distant futures might look like, what kinds of problems we might find there, and what kinds of opportunities those problems could present to us today 
This is a very different kind of question than asking how to fit a square peg into a round hole
These questions ask you to imagine what the future will look like
 The trick, of course, is that the future is not a single place
EXAMPLES
Here are a couple of examples
GO THROUGH SLIDES – how would you answer this question?
Think about it from the perspective of a company in this space
The point, of course, is that there is no one way to answer these particular questions, because they are “un-defined”
And because there is no one future out there, the way to think about them is to imagine alternative futures
What those futures will look like and what might be found there, or not found there
How will people do things in those futures, or not do them; how will people live in the future
What problems will be found – problems that create opportunities for us today
Tools
Four tools to explore un-defined problems
Define each one
Example: The First Plane Launched from a Ship
Look at this photo from 1910
What is that plane going to do to those great ships?
What they were looking for was over-the-horizon reconnaissance
But what were the trends around airplane construction and capabilities?
Where are the opportunities?
30 Years Later
In 1910, or for that matter in 1920, who would have predicted that Japanese planes could obliterate the pride of the Royal Navy off the coast of Singapore in a matter of minutes
But Only a Year Before
The sad joke is that only a year before the British had done the same thing to the Italian fleet anchored at Taranto, and with much less capable planes than the Japanese would use
A classic case of “not learning”
Example: Number of Horses
How about this trend?
Standing in 1880, if you had projected out the number of horses in the US by 1950, there would have been no room for people
Cities were becoming unlivable due to the amount manure, urine, and flies
A trend that cannot continue, will not continue
And that presents opportunities
Now What is the Trend to the Absurd?
It was the automobile that saved cities – something of a joke now
But now what is the trend?
Horses vanished because of automobiles (the first recognizably modern one was the Mercedes Benz around 1905)
Just as we asked what will the world look like if there are hundreds of millions of horses, so we could have asked, What will the world look like if everyone owns a car?
Now turn it around – what will the world look like if nobody owns a car, or anything for that matter
Just talk to undergrads these days – many of them do now want to own anything and are trying desperately to reduce their consumer footprint
Example: Water
Suppose all you had was one liter of water a day?
Would it force you to thing differently about water and we use it?
Example: What if Refugees Can Never Go Home
Here is another example
How many refugees are there in the world?
Per the UN, over 27 million; and over 82 million displaced people
Since the Second World War, the assumption is that refugees either return home or get absorbed into their host countries
But what if that is no longer true?
So the Brookings Institute carried this trend to its absurd conclusion, what if refugees can never go home?  What do you do?
They suggested building new kinds of cities; ones that will serve as engines of economic growth, as cities have always done
Think about the problems that will be found in such a future, and the opportunities
Example: Trends Affecting City Life
Here are some examples I put together for a workshop I gave the city of Jerusalem
A basic Google search will turn up endless trends that are interesting, any of which can be explored
What would the future city look like if you carried any of these to their absurd conclusion
For example – what will the future look like if all policing is done through surveillance and AI?
Or what will it look like if there is no city center anymore?
Or if all food must be produced locally? – a return to the Middle Ages?
Example: Moore’s Law
The point of all this is that you take a real trend and push it out beyond the near, and even the medium term; all the way to the absurd
And then see what you get
Trends that look perfectly reasonable often do not look so reasonable when pushed to an extreme
Which gives you a chance to think about discontinuities; and what comes next
Example: Urbanization
Here is another example
What if nobody lives outside of cities
How will this work?
What problems will we find?  And what opportunities?
Class Exercise
Start by thinking about the biggest changes in our lives
Pick one
Do a quick google search
And now carry it to its absurd conclusion and try to imagine this future
How will people live
What will be missing and needed – products, services, policies
CHANGE SLIDES FOR MORE EXAMPLES
The Process
Trend analysis is a tool that forces us to think differently about the future
We are built to think in terms of straight lines, to imagine that the future will look very much like the present, only more so
But what if it doesn’t – just think about the changes you have seen in your life
Trend analysis is a tool that helps us think about the impact of big changes happening out there, and the opportunities that open up for innovation
How – by picking a trend, researching it, and then carrying it to its absurd conclusion
Try to imagine this future
How will people live there
What will be missing and needed – products, services, policies
Example from the head of digital transformation at a health insurer in Israel – what happens if you never see a doctor in person ever again
Examples
Here are some examples
Exercise: Trend Analysis (homework)
Choose a trend and research it
Carry it to its absurd conclusion
Describe the world and what it might look like – how things will be done, or not done in this future world
What is missing?
What problems will be found?
Think in terms of use cases – a description of how users will want to do something or achieve something or interact with something; or be unable to do something
For homework, we want you to work in teams and use this template
We are looking for good problems to solve, opportunities, not solutions (at least not right now)


METHOD 2: SCENARIO ANALYSIS
How to Use Scenario Analysis
Scenario analysis is a second technique we use to think differently about the future
Again, this is the entire point of un-defined problems
The key idea here (and really of both techniques) is that we are not predicting what the future will be, but describing alternative possible futures that are rooted in what is actually happening now
Trend analysis is straightforward – take a trend, carry it forward, and see if anything interesting shows up
Scenario analysis is different – it is more formal
It posits a set of possible futures, but attaches no probabilities
It creates stories along known dimensions 
READ THE SLIDE – this is the way we create scenarios
Not the Nine Box Matrix
Scenario analysis is not some version of the 9-box matrix, a popular HR tool used to measure employee performance and to identify employees with leadership potential, created by McKinsey in 1970
It was later adapted by GE to identify key investments and to compare various business units
The problem is that probability and impact can really only be measured for low uncertainty opportunities
By contrast, scenario analysis is not a predictive tool, but a descriptive tool by which we create alternative futures that can then be explored for problems and opportunities
Example: The Future of Education
Let’s take an example
What is the future of education
How would you even begin answering that
One way is a trend analysis – what will the world look like if we never return to traditional classrooms
Or, what will the world look like if we are all taught by robots
With scenario analysis, we build four possible, but distinct futures, and then ask what we might find, or not find, there
The key starting step is choice of axes – you can see several possibilities on the slide
A good place to get axes is from a trend analysis
The point is that there is no perfect way to do scenarios – the only good answer is one that you find useful
Very important – the scenarios need to mirror each other
Scenario Analysis for Education
These are the two axes that we chose – delivery method (virtual or in-person) and method of instruction (a real teacher or a robot with AI)
You will notice that scenarios are given descriptive names, usually accompanied by pictures
Descriptions of the Scenarios
The next step is to actually write the descriptions
In general, this would require real research and an analysis of current trends
Extremely important – the scenarios need to mirror each other, i.e. the same kind of stuff needs to be in each box
Opportunities from Scenario Analysis
The last step is to then search each scenario for the interesting problems that might be found in such a future – take a look at the ones on the slide
Problems are, of course, opportunities; and the key is to find the most interesting opportunities that could actually be started today
A simple way of thinking about this is to ask what kinds of products and services and policies will be needed if this future comes to pass?
HAVE STUDENTS GIVE OTHER EXAMPLES
Would the answer be different if you were a student or parent or government official, rather than a teacher?
Example: What is the Future of Healthcare in the US?
Here is an example that was worked out by a group of our students
The future of healthcare in the US
GO THROUGH SLIDES
Step 1: Do Your Research
The first thing they did was some basic research
Step 2: Identify Possible Axes
Then they defined some possible axes
There is no formula here
You pick ones that you think will work, and see where they take you
Which ones would you pick?
Step 3: Build the 2x2 Matrix
You can see which ones the students chose
First you name the scenarios and include a picture
Step 4: Fill in the Matrix
Then based on their research and thinking, they described each scenario; i.e., an alternative future
Whether we like the future or not
Step 5: Where are the Opportunities?
What is the next step – figure out the problems that people will face in such futures
And thus the kinds of opportunities that we can start to create today
Class Exercise
Now you try it.  
What is our climate future?
Prepare a scenario analysis
The first step is to decide on axes? – give examples
Scenario Analysis: Climate Future
Here are the two axes that we chose
Very simply
the world gets its act together, or it does not
technology saves us, or it does not
Do a quick scenario analysis
Step one – develop the scenarios – they are stories of the future
Step two – what products, services, or policies will be needed in each future
What is needed, of course, depends on the perspective of the stakeholder – consumers, businesses, civil society
Important points:
Scenarios should mirror each other – temperature, migration, investment
Think in terms of use cases – how will we live, what kinds of products and services will be needed there
IF THERE IS TIME, DO IN CLASS
Example: Choosing Axes
Now you try it
Pick one and the first thing is to come up with some axes
Exercise: Prepare a Scenario Analysis
Homework – use the best axes to develop a formal scenario analysis
At this point, all we want is the descriptions of the future, the stories
Remember to have all the scenarios mirror each other
Finding Problems Worth Solving
REVIEW HOMEWORK
Now the goal is to look at these scenarios and use them as springboards for innovative thinking by finding problems that are worth solving
How do we do that – two ways – intensive and extensive
Option 1: Diving Deep in a Scenario
Intensive means diving deep into a scenario
Identify the interesting problems that people will find there
What is missing in this future world?  Products, services, policies?
Think in terms of use cases
Option 2: Look for Commonalities among Scenarios
Extensive means looking across the scenarios and finding what they have in common or what is missing from them all
Think in terms of use cases
This is the common strategic approach, where a company wants to prepare for the future, no matter what the future brings
The Process
Here is the process for using a scenario analysis
Exercise: Scenario Analysis and Opportunities
Now try it for the scenario analysis you created
Find opportunities either in one scenario (easier) or across scenarios

METHOD 3: SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
What are Systems?
Systems give us another way to think about un-defined problems and escape from presentism
So what is a system? – an interconnected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something. 
Systems are not random collections of elements.
A system must consist of three kinds of things: 
elements, 
interconnections, and 
a function or purpose.
Nested Hierarchies
Systems have a structure, what we can call nested hierarchies, going from the most basic elements all the way up to big, inclusive stuff
Here is a random example I found online
Interventions to reduce smoking that go from the package to individuals to communities to entire populations
Another Example
Here is another example of systems structure and nested hierarchies
These levels, their interconnections, and the purpose of the entire system give us a way of exploring alternative futures for innovation opportunities
They also give us a way of connecting un-defined with ill-defined problems
For example, a way of tying together what the future of the system might look like with what’s the next big in any part of the hierarchy
Example: What is the Future of Submarine Warfare?
Let’s take an example
What’s the future of submarine warfare – clearly an un-defined problem
One way to start exploring this problem is to situate submarines themselves within a nested hierarchy
All the way from the hundred or so elements and sub-systems of a submarine all the way to national policy and strategy
Trending to the Absurd
Suppose you had been head of the navy in 1910
If you follow the trend all the way out, there would be thousands of submarines by 1930
Just as we asked before, what are the implications of such a future?  What kinds of problems will be found?  And what, therefore, are the opportunities for innovation?
What are the Implications For…
There are implications, and thus opportunities, for every level of the hierarchy
READ FROM SLIDE
In other words, back to the core components of a system – elements, interconnections, purpose
What are the opportunities to make the elements better?
What are the opportunities to make the interconnections better?
What are the opportunities to re-think the purpose of the system?
The Process
Here is a summary of the process
Examples
Now you try it
Here are some possible domains of interest
Exercise: Systems Analysis
Now you try it

ILL-DEFINED PROBLEMS
Problem Types
Innovation begins with finding problems worth solving
Our point is that there are different kinds of problems with different time horizons, different degrees of uncertainty and risk, and they cannot be addressed or “solved” in all the same way
Un-defined problems are addressed by exploring possible futures and seeing what kinds of problems might be found there that can be addressed starting today
Ill-defined problems are still traditional in the sense that they are present forward; by contrast, un-defined problems are future backward
Ill-Defined Problems
Ill-defined problems look at what is plausible in a technology or market space or customer experience in order to find the next big problem worth working on
The point is that many, many things could answer the question, “What’s the next big thing?”
And like un-defined problems, ill-defined problems help us create a portfolio of innovation
Example: What’s Next Big Thing for Electric Vehicles
Ill-defined problems are not about imagining distant futures, but operate on a shorter time horizon and ask “What’s the next big thing here, in this specific space?”
For example, the question on this slide is not “What’s the future of electric vehicles?” but what’s the next big thing for anyone who will use or manufacture them
Example: Baltimore Harbor
Here is an example
It all began when students went down to the Baltimore Harbor and were shocked by the amount of pollution they saw there; and decided they wanted to do something 
Let’s be clear – they did not ask about future state of the harbor
Rather, the question they asked themselves was how to clean up pollution in waterways
The possibilities are near endless
Framing an Ill-Defined Problem
Which is what makes it an ill-defined problem – there is no single solution for the simple reason that there is no clearly defined problem yet that can be solved
Something is missing; something is needed to constrain the problem
Supplying those constraints is what then allows us to begin building the lists that are the “answer” to an ill-defined problem
It is the ability to drive the creation of such lists that represents the true power of ill-defined problems (as well as un-defined problems)
And from that list you pick the ones you want to work on
The Process for Creating an Ill-Defined Problem
So the first thing the students did to address this ill-defined space was to supply the missing elements by clarifying what kind of waterway, and what kind of pollution
They decided to focus on trash in inland waterways
And then they made lists of opportunities using a set of tools and techniques
And the lists were quite extensive – similar to the DTA example on the first day
The Solution
Then they picked one opportunity and turned it into a well-defined problem
In this case – how to continuously clean up trash from inland waterways with minimal human intervention and oversight? – what you see here
They designed and built a robot that uses AI and computer vision to clean up the harbor – something like a water-based Roomba
This is a well-defined problem because whatever solution they built either worked or it did not – the solution was falsifiable
The PixieDrone
And, of course, they were years ahead of their time – there are now lots of companies out there chasing the students’ idea, for example the one you see here
Over the years, our students have probably left hundreds of millions of dollars worth of funding on the table from all the good ideas they have chosen not to pursue
Summary: Using Ill-Defined Problems
To summarize, ill-defined problems are very different from un-defined problems
They do not ask about future states in a very uncertain world, but simply what is plausibly the next big thing inherent in this particular situation
And the key is that there is no single answer; in fact, many things could actually address the “problem”
Hence, we make lists
Like un-defined problems, ill-defined problems can help us create a bank of interesting opportunities
From which we can then select the best ones and turn them into well-defined problems that can actually be solved

Tools for Exploring Ill-Defined Problems
So how do we actually explore ill-defined problems – through a combination of intensive and extensive searching of market and technological spaces
I will give you some tools for going about all this
Two Kinds of Innovation
A good way of thinking about extensive searching comes from a book by Frans Johansson, where he describes “intersectional ideas,” a theory that he developed by asking why the Renaissance was such an extraordinarily creative period
Intersectional Ideas
Johansson claims that there are two kinds of ideas:
Directional ideas are where we know where we are going, and
Intersectional ideas, where we don’t know where we are going, and are often the product of serendipity
Characteristics
Intersectional ideas are where we put two things together in surprising, unusual, non-obvious, and fascinating ways.
The key is that the combination is unexpected
But this is the way the world has always progressed, and the way technology has always advanced
Everything “new” is really just a new combination of existing ideas; because no “new thing” comes out of nothing
Examples:
Computational biology
Behavioral economics
Evolutionary theories of technological development
Fusion cooking
The smart phone
Example: Celcy
Or this example from a student project that is now a real company – they combined a freezer and an oven
How to Make Barriers Fall
The question is how to create intersectional ideas
Here are some examples
This is what companies try to do all the time by forcing people from different parts of the organization to meet and talk, and then wait to see what comes out of it
The Process
Now you try it – put two things together that have never before been put together
Start with one thing that you care deeply about and then combine it with a wide range of other ideas, and see what you come up with
What are the opportunities?
Two Constants
A more intensive approach comes from the book The Four Lenses by Rowan Gibson, which also comes from his research on the Renaissance
He writes that all innovation has two elements
One, an insight
And two, the big idea that comes out of the insight
Insight in the sense of seeing what others do not see
Four Lenses
And where do these insights come from?
From the four lenses you see here
We will use these as an organizing principle as we explore ill-defined problems class by class

Harnessing Trends – Exploiting Changes
Example: Amazon
We will begin looking for a great problem to solve by asking what’s changing – the first of Gibson’s four lenses
The key is that macro-trends out there change things
Change always wrecks things, and always creates opportunities, often as a result of the wrecking
This view of changes is different from before, 
We are not carrying trends to their absurd conclusion, but simply asking what might be the next big thing to come out of this trend that we can plausibly take advantage of now
For example, Amazon began by asking what was next for the internet
Jeff Bezos was a banker, and what he noticed was that internet usage was growing by thousands of percentages a month
All he wanted was to take advantage of that trend
He was sure e-commerce would be big, but how?  And sell what?
In the end, Amazon changed how we shop and wrecked stores and manufacturers all over America
How – by taking advantage of changing trends, including advancing technology and changing consumer buying habits
We could do the same thing all over again – what’s the next big thing for Amazon?  What trends can it take advantage of?  What is being wrecked out there that offers opportunities as well?
Example: Blockbuster
Hard to explain now how Blockbuster changed our lives
Blockbuster wrecked movie theaters, just as Blockbuster was wrecked by Netflix, just as Amazon has wrecked lots of companies
How – by taking advantage of changing trends, including technology and consumer tastes
What trends did Blockbuster take advantage of
Availability of content
Availability of players
People wanting to stay home and have the movie experience at home
Four Types Macro-Trends
Changes occurring out there are often thought of in terms of PEST
Examples
Here is a list from a colleague in Sao Paulo
CHANGE SLIDE
Here is another set from Scott Shane, a deep thinker about innovation
CHANGE SLIDE
Or the metaverse
CHANGE SLIDE
Or Google trends
Bloomberg’s view of changes that are happening and that will dominate the world in the coming decade, a result of Covid, climate change, de-globalization, and the maturing of China
CHANGE SLIDE
McKinsey Technology Trends Outlook 2022
CHANGE SLIDE
The next normal – or all the changes that have resulted from Covid
CHANGE SLIDE
Or waves from Gibson
There are endless examples out there
Class Exercise
Make a quick list of key macro-trends – PEST again
What will they wreck?
Where are the opportunities that come out of that wreckage?

The Technology Complex
Let’s look at one category of changes in more detail – technology and science
First it must be remembered that technology is not a simple thing, but represents a complex
Think of all that is involved in using an induction stove, or a solar panel, or an electric vehicle, or tele-medicine
Technological Transitions
As these complexes change over time, they undermine the competitive advantages of existing firms
Diminishing Returns
But as technologies mature, they experience ever diminishing returns
Technology S-Curves
Technological changes and transitions can be thought of as s-curves, where improvement in the technology per unit of input diminishes over time
In other words, technological improvement runs up against barriers, either physical or market, and that is when opportunities for disruptive innovations present themselves
So here is the question, where are technologies reaching their limit? 
For example, how much more power can they build into your phone before you stop caring, and stop wanting to pay for it
An Evolutionary Process
In other words, technological change can be thought of as an evolutionary process where a long series of small changes is abruptly ended by a big change
Big changes lead to what are called technological discontinuities, which create enormous opportunities for innovators
Macro and Micro-Inventions
Another way to think about this is in terms of micro-and macro-inventions
Micro-inventions can be explained by basic economics and marketing
Who wins at micro-changes – incumbent players
Who often wins at macro-changes – disruptive companies
The real question is where macro-inventions come from – you can improve a wagon all you want, but you will never get a car.  
Macro changes are often intersectional ideas (a new combination of things)
For example, cars come from combining wagons and internal combustion engines.
Dominant Designs
Macro- and micro-changes can be combined in the model you see here
Technological change can be thought of as an evolutionary process where a long series of small changes is abruptly ended by a big change
Big changes lead to what are called technological discontinuities, which ultimately create what are called dominant designs
So what is a dominant design?
Think about it like this – why are all USB ports the same; or why are all lightbulb sockets the same?
And the answer is because they represent a dominant design
We get dominant designs from
Government mandate
Somebody wins in the marketplace
Industry players get together
Dominant designs can be thought of as paradigms, whether technological or social or political
But at some point, they begin to fall apart; you can feel it in the air; and that is when enormous opportunities present themselves
Class Exercise
Where is a dominant design falling apart? Whether political, economic, social, or technological?
What are the changes?  What is being wrecked?
Where are the opportunities that come from these changes?
Strategic Inflection Points
Famous book by Andy Grove
Industries have a structure, until they don’t; similar to dominant designs
Strategic inflection points are when those structures fall apart
Look at these diagrams – this is an example of a macro-technological shift at work
At what point did it all change?
Why did it all change?
What made it all change?
What got wrecked, and then created opportunities?
Indicators of a Strategic Inflection Point
The question that Andy Grove explored is how you know when it is happening to you and your company
His famous point is that you will never see it in the data or the accounting reports

Futures Wheel: Thinking through the Implications
All this is very interesting, but what concerns us here in this course is trying to figure out the implications of the macro-changes occurring out there
Once again, we can engage in random brainstorming, or we can try to use a more structured process
One famous tool is called a futures wheel, invented by Jerome Glenn in 1971 as “a method for graphical visualisation of direct and indirect future consequences of a particular change or development”
Following are a couple of examples – you can see how complicated this can get
A Better Idea: What are the Consequences of Widescale Automobile Adoption?
For example, what kind of futures wheel would you construct to think through the implications of changes in the adoption of different technologies
Just take one, the car – if you were standing in 1910, what would your futures wheel look like
Systems Diagram: Mapping the Consequences of Widescale Automobile Adoption
So we developed a tool that we think is a little easier to use
Choose a set of PEST categories and then ask how rapid adoption of the car might impact each category
The Process
Choose a domain of interest to you
Research some trends impacting that domain and pick one
What is changing?  What is being wrecked?
Where are the opportunities?
In other words, what is the next big problem worth solving?
Homework
Try it at home now



Understanding Needs – What’s Next for a User Experience
This class we will look for the next great problem to solve by asking what opportunities unsatisfied user experiences offer us, another of Gibson’s four lenses
Example: Warby Parker
They were JHU grads and completely reimagined how we can buy glasses
Which industry assumptions did they question; and which technological and social trends did they take advantage of (e.g., the changing nature of how we buy)
They did not invent either glasses or ordering things online
All they did was change the user experience, and that changed everything
Example: Casper
They completely reimagined how we can buy mattresses
Which industry assumptions did they question; and which technological and social trends did they take advantage of (e.g., the changing nature of how we buy)
Again, all this seems obvious, but only in retrospect
Example: Improving the User Burrito Experience
The list of user experiences that can be explored is endless
Big stuff like how we interact with government or physicians
Or little stuff, like how we interact with burritos
But it starts by looking around and seeing the world and our lives with new eyes
As Warren Berger wrote, as if we were seeing the world for the first time; just like little kids
Process Mapping
A critical tool here is process mapping (which is what the burrito team did)
Writing down what users do step by step
And then ranking how important each step is to you against how satisfied you are
Where are the opportunities – high importance and low satisfaction 
Example: Intralox
This example comes forma company that we worked with
The company designs specialized conveyor belts for soft packaging
The innovation team designed a new product offering and were convinced that they were going to walk away with first prize at the big logistics and material handling conference
They didn’t even get an honorable mention
The companies that won are on the top left
You will notice that they are almost all robotics companies
So what the team at Intralox did was combine some ideas about dominant designs (the list in the middle) with process mapping in the space that they play in, i.e. bulk parcel management (in yellow) and then see where robots currently play in their space of gravity belts
What the analysis showed was the space for opportunity for them to move further back in the value chain, rather than just their traditional offerings at the very end
The Advantage of Process Maps
Process maps allow you visualize what could be eliminated or combined
And what kinds of new problems could be identified and then addressed
For example, what are the steps to brewing a cup of coffee?
Where are the opportunities for improvement?
Opportunity: Stagg EKG Electric Kettle
Here is an example, $165 later
The Process
Map a user experience
Where are the opportunities?

Jobs To Be Done
Jobs-to-be-Done are a slightly different, more intensive way of thinking through the user experience
Examples: Telephone, Television, Coffee
Go through the job that we hire these products for
The key here is thinking about what you are trying to accomplish, rather than any particular technology or product or service
Discovering and describing these jobs leads to questioning the efficacy of the tools being hired to do the particular jobs
Can the tools be improved either in a little way or in a really big way?
Do we need completely different tools?
Do you remember the example of Marconi
What job was he trying to get done? – sending messages where there were no wires; certainly better than semaphore
A good well-defined problem, which he solved
It was the solution that then led to all kinds of innovations as new jobs to be done were discovered
Had he looked at the jobs that marketing people were trying to do – reach as many people as they can with their message – he might have been the one to have invented modern radio
Marconi is the classic example of a solution in search of a problem
But it still requires imagination to find the right job to be done
What job could Delta’s Parallel Reality address?
Competing Against Luck
Jobs to be done comes out of Clayton Christensen’s model of sustaining and disruptive innovations
Comes from his book The Innovator’s Dilemma, where he wrote that existing companies always win at sustaining innovations because they have the customers and the resources, but often lose at emerging and disruptive innovations to new players
Why? – because they do everything right
Everything they taught you in MBA school
They have a hard time imagining a different future because they are so present focused
The Signals of Change
The question is where disruptive innovations come from
The first attempt he made to answer this is what you see here
An example of non-consumption would be at-home pregnancy tests.
Undershot and overshot offer opportunities to create both high-end and low-end products
Sustaining or Disruptive?
But this answer never really satisfied anyone
As an example, is the Apple Watch a sustaining or disruptive innovation
The answer depends on what you use it for, and that takes us to his second attempt at an answer, the idea of jobs to be done, which he explored in his 2016 book
The Data Never Tells You Why
The problem is that the marketing data only tells that something was purchased, but never why
What exactly was the job that a person hired the product to do
What is a Job?
So what is a job? – it is the progress that an individual seeks in a given circumstance. 
Critical is the idea that we don’t invent jobs, we discover them by watching people and mapping out what they do
Think again of TV, coffee, cell phones
Jobs insights are fragile — they’re more like stories than statistics, and require deep knowledge of what people are doing
Opportunities arise when people are not making progress in their lives and you come up with a way that they can
The iPad: Escaping Presentism
Story of iPad and my mother
What job was she trying to accomplish?  
In this case , the tool came before the job – Steve Jobs’ idea was that people would find jobs to do with the iPad
Which calls into question Christensen’s point that innovation starts with finding jobs to be done
In this case, the tool came first and was adapted to all kinds of jobs
Summary: Where are the Opportunities?
To summarize, jobs to be done are a type of ill-defined problem
Once you understand a job deeply, what people are actually trying to accomplish in their lives, then you can start to devise tools (products, services, and policies) that can help them better do this job
Or eliminate the things that prevent them from doing the job they want to do
The question is what prevents these jobs from being done better, faster, cheaper
What products or services could be developed to help do them better, faster, cheaper?
Combining Importance and Satisfaction
Process mapping will help us again
Break the job apart and then look at each step through the lenses of importance and satisfaction
How important is the outcome to you, and how unsatisfied are with the options currently available
The analysis can be taken to any level of detail
You want to focus on the things that are important but not well satisfied
Example of Southwest
They survey you about the cabin experience, the food and the politeness of the attendants – is that what you really care about?
Or when they survey you at work about how you feel about the company and your boss – what do you really care about?
Exercise
How would Generative AI help you do a better job of…?
Remember, whatever progress you are trying to make in your life is an innovation opportunity
The first step is to identify the job to be done, which usually means breaking the job down into parts with a process map
The Process
What jobs are you trying to accomplish in your life?
What are the roadblocks preventing you from doing the job better (because it can always be done better)?
Where are the opportunities?
Exercise: Job to be Done
Identify a job of importance to you
How well do the tools hired to help to do the job work
Again, a problem is something that does not work as it should
Pick one and map the job out
Process map them and identify what keeps you from making progress
Identify problems and opportunities
Think in terms of use cases
The problem is that too many jobs to be done are present focused – example of CBID and working with surgeons and doctors

Challenging Orthodoxies – What’s Next for an Industry Space
In this class we will look for the next great problem to solve by asking what opportunities companies can find as they ponder technologies, macro-trends, user experiences, and their own products and markets
In other words, what’s missing out there in a particular market space
And we can do this by challenging orthodoxies, another of Gibson’s four lenses
Example: Netflix
Netflix used to mail out disks
But with the growth of the internet, they asked themselves what was next; 
What orthodoxy did they challenge
Streaming was the answer – a combination of tech and social trends and rethinking the user experience
The answer seems obvious only in retrospect
And after streaming, what was the next big thing? – content
And now what is the next big thing for them
Example: Starbucks
Howard Schultz did not invent the coffee shop
And Starbucks did not invent the café
What orthodoxies did Starbucks challenge
What do you do in a café?
Schultz tried to bring the idea of an Italian café to America – it did not work
Instead, he invented the idea of an American café – a third place between home and work, but really what we do there is work – Starbucks reinvented the user experience
But what’s next for Starbucks?
How Did They Do It?
How did these companies reinvent their industry spaces – by challenging assumptions and paradigms
And if you can get beyond current orthodoxies and paradigms, what do you see?
And how can it help you see what the next big thing might be
What new possibilities open up

A More Beautiful Question
In a similar vein, Warren Berger has written a lovely little book where he challenges us to look at the world as if we were seeing it for the first time
Something like John Rawls’ question – how would you organize the world if you did not know ahead of time the place and circumstances into which you would be born 
Three Part Model
But after asking why, innovators need to go the next step and start to imagine a different world (that idea again), and how we might get there
Why, what if, how
Class Exercise
Now try it yourself
Choose something and ask why it is the way that it is
What can be challenged?
How can received wisdom be challenged?
Which dominant designs should be challenged?
It is a matter of asking why the world is the way it is.  What’s missing?  Couldn’t it be better?


Terms of Competition
Example: Cameras
What you see here is a traditional camera kit
So here is the question – how do you get from here to the next big thing?
Start with Traditional Terms of Competition
For our example here, how do cameras traditionally compete?  
Along what dimensions of analysis? – the ones you see here
The next questions are
How can these traditional terms of competition and features be changed?
What new jobs to be done might then be found?
Step 1: Un-Constrain the Space
The first step is to un-constrain the space by challenging the traditional terms of competition, the traditional ways that companies in the space competed (much like Starbucks and Netflix)
In other words, they introduced different ways to compete
And we do this by asking questions, as Berger said; what if…
GO THROUGH SLIDE
Step 2: Expand the Space
After un-constraining the space, we try to expand the space and create new ill-defined and un-defined spaces
GO THROUGH SLIDE
The Next Big Thing
And so you end up with GoPro and drones – what are the terms of competition here?
In short, they reversed the terms of competition; they turned them on their head
The Result
And so we have gone from a complicated device to a simple one that changes our perspective
Blue Ocean Strategy
Blue Ocean Strategy is a famous book that has changed how we speak about new markets, but at its core it is a book about challenging assumptions and creating new terms of competition – and what will also allow us to change the meaning of things
The idea is to find (or create) a blue ocean where there is no competition and you can print money, or so the theory goes
As we will discuss next term, there is always competition – the issue is how you deal with it
Four Actions Framework
So how do you actually create a blue ocean
According to the authors, by using their Four Actions Framework
The point is that these four key questions challenge an industry’s strategic logic and established business mode
Class Exercise
Now try it yourself
The university??  Sephora??  A favorite company of yours??
What assumptions is the organization making regarding business models, technologies, user experiences
What can be challenged?
How can received wisdom be challenged?
Which dominant designs should be challenged?
How can the terms of competition be changed?
It is a matter of asking why the world is the way it is.  How could it be different?  And possibly better?

Case Study: Wine
Wine is Old
This is a lovely case study of how to change the terms of competition and create a blue ocean
Wine is old – 9000 varieties of grapes
Until modern times wine was drunk because it provided nourishment, as well as forgetting
But pleasure it did not provide – modern wine tastes nothing like ancient or medieval wines
How grapes became wine was a mystery solved only in modern times, which is why there was always a hint of the divine
Main Types of Wine
Although there are only a few major types of wine out there, in reality the number of wines is essentially uncountable
Even more interesting is the fact that the number of commercially viable grapes are only about 150
And the major varieties that occupy the vast majority of plantings are only about 15
Although those numbers are increasing thanks to modern techniques as well as consumer interest in local varieties
The Traditional Producers
Medieval monks were the first ones who figured out that terroir mattered
First in Burgundy in France, only much later in Bordeaux 
Estates like you see here are an attempt in the 19th century to create a tradition where there was none; but the public bought the image and we have associated quality with pictures like you see here ever since
The Traditional Images
Hence the importance of bottles that look like this
Look at the labels and the chateaux on the bottles with all kind of words that only cognoscenti understand
The Traditional Vocabulary
If you want to consider yourself a wine connoisseur, then this is the basic vocabulary you must know
The Traditional Label
This vocabulary then shows up on traditional labels
Think about how declassee you would look if you actually asked the guy in the fancy wine store to explain this label to you
Traditional Regions – Example: Bordeaux
Not to mention you need to know the classic wine regions of France – Bordeaux, Burgundy, Champagne, the Rhone, Alsace, and the Loire
Not to mention their subregions
The Traditional Wine Shopping Experience
When you go into a store, how do you know what to buy
It is intimidating
The Traditional Terms of Competition
So how do traditional wines compete with each other?
Along the lines that you see here
Do you even understand what they are talking about?
The US Wine Market in 2000
This is what the US market looked like before Yellowtail
There were over 7500 wine producers in the US alone
Terms of Competition in 2000
Competing along the lines you see here, the traditional ones
How Should Casella Wines Enter This Market?
So how would you enter this market or distinguish yourself
Remember, marketing is all about drawing distinctions
This was exactly the question that Yellowtail asked itself
It seems like a daunting proposition
The Four Actions Framework
What Yellowtail did was rethink the terms of competition from the ground up
The Four Actions Framework can help you here
New Terms of Competition
Very simply, Yellowtail changed some terms of competition, and added new ones
The made wine simple and easy to drink
Mostly by making it fruity and very slightly sweet
The Result
None of the traditional label stuff here
Big bold red and cool crisp white
You have no idea what the grapes even are
The Result
In short, what Yellowtail did was take advantage of certain macro-trends to change the user experience, which in turned challenged the industry
The growing popularity of wine
Deep wine knowledge is scarce
Wider application of scientific methods so that almost all wines are good now
And the peculiar taste buds of Americans raised on Coca Cola
And the retail experience has changed accordingly and has now become an opportunity to educate consumers
The shift from expensive to affordable


The Process
Step 1: Start with Where You Are
Here is the process
Start with where you are
List out the current terms of competition; all the current features and benefits
Step 2: Un-Constrain the Space
Then un-constrain the space by asking how the current terms of competition can be changed or reversed
Challenge orthodoxies and current paradigms
Ask questions
Challenge current assumptions, paradigms, and dominant designs
What new opportunities arise by changing the terms of competition
Or what new jobs to be done can be found by repurposing the current terms of competition
Step 3: Expand the Space
What new un-defined and ill-defined problems can you create and then explore
You Try It – How Would You Get to Radio?
An important message that is sent from point to point, where the sending is controlled by intermediaries using two-way devices and specialized code
GO THROUGH SLIDES

Case Study: The Adaptive Air Mattress
Example: A New Design for a Mattress
This is from a former group of ChemBE students who had developed new materials that responded to body weight and temperature
ChemBE students: Rachel Fitzpatrick and Nicole Cheng
The science: The most ChemBE part of it was probably attempted heat transfer calculations and fluid dynamics
CHANGE SLIDE
Here are the science results they came up with showing how adaptive air reduces pressure points 
Where is the Market?
Lovely technology 
So where is the best market? – healthcare obviously
They decided to focus on pressure ulcers, a truly terrible problem and a very large market
But selling to hospitals is very complex – you have to be able to prove your case clinically, with hard evidence
Terms of Competition
The real question however is not what is the best market, but what is the best problem to solve – they are related questions, but not the same
Remember, in this case we are starting with the solution
So how do we start? – with the current terms of competition
READ THEM
Do you really want to change or reverse any of these? – not really
So the question then becomes – can we find a better job to be done that takes advantage of the same terms of competition
Expanding the Problem Space
And we do that by expanding the problem space in an effort to create new ill-defined and un-defined problems that can then be explored
GO THROUGH SLIDE
So what is the best problem that can be addressed with this technology
The Result
Here is the result – a mattress that utilizes all the current terms of competition and for which people will pay serious money
They took the idea to REI and the manager offered to buy a hundred of them on the spot
The Result
To summarize, the team went from a specialized bed requiring FDA approval and a very long selling cycle to a camping bed that people would pay many hundreds of dollars for, and which required only the approval of a store manager
You Try It
Delta’s parallel reality
Exercise
Homework


Whitespace Mapping: Challenging Assumptions
Whitespace mapping is another technique that can be used to help think through how to change and/or get beyond the current terms of competition
Price for the y-axis is a good place to start, but other attributes could be used
For the x-axis examples include:
beer: heavy/light; bitter/mild
scotch: peaty/floral; finish (smooth/sharp)
red wine: simple/complex; light/heavy
chocolate: milk/dark
Cameras: analog/digital; automatic/manual
YouTube videos: informative/entertaining vs. length
Finding the Holes
Much of scientific innovation is a matter of pattern recognition
Seeing the whole, but also seeing the holes, seeing what is missing
The point is that this seeing is no longer random
Example: Whitespace Maps
This is the traditional car rental market – what is missing?
Rentals used to be only a few days and centered around airports
CHANGE SLIDE
Enterprise pioneered longer term rentals (e.g., when your car is in the shop after an accident) and put the stores out in neighborhoods
CHANGE SLIDE
What is still missing?
The Process
Start with an industry or category or domain of interest to you
The first step is to figure out what the current, relevant terms of competition are and use two them as axes
And then map the current competitors or players to the axes 
And then see what is missing, where the white spaces are
Exercise: Create a Whitespace Map
Create a whitespace map
What is missing?
What is the next big thing in the space?

The Innovation of Meaning
Roberto Verganti presents a way of looking at the world with new eyes.  Not just a matter of a new thing, but how things create new meanings in our lives.
Examples include Instagram, Waze
Or how creams and lotions and spas are now part of self-care, rather than just having soft skin
Or going to a doctor – change from annual physical to managing my old age
This is not only about changing the thing itself but about changing the terms of competition to create new meaning
Look Beyond Features and Functions
Again, you need to look beyond features and functions to the role that such a product or service could play in our lives
People Do Not Buy Products, They Buy Meaning
Think about it, isn’t this what we really want
Not things, but meaning in our lives
Give People a New Reason to Buy
Bottom line – Verganti’s point is that a key to innovation is giving people a new reason to buy
Which to use our language means challenging existing paradigms and changing the terms of competition
Layers of Meaning
It is also important to remember that there are different kinds of meanings, and innovation can occur in any level
Example: Peleton
Peleton is a stationary bike and a computer; a nice bike but nothing new
What terms of competition did it change?
Think about how it has changed the entire experience of an exercise bike
Example: Blue Apron
Blue Apron is a company that puts together all the ingredients you need to cook a meal at home
Which meanings have been changed
Example: Mobile Phones
And for a really famous example, look how the meaning of a telephone has changed – functional, emotional, and social
More Examples:
Go through examples
Begin with kitchens
Exercise: What is this Thing?
One way to start this is to simply ask, “What is this thing?”
You try it – reimagine a user experience, a technology, a product, an institution by changing its meaning
What you should have noticed is that changing the meaning of a thing requires that you think about both terms of competition and the user experience or the job to be done
The Process
Fundamentally, inventing new meanings is about finding new jobs to be done for products and services
Examples
Some examples for you
Exercise
Homework



WICKED PROBLEMS
Burkina Faso
This is Burkina Faso
A former student ran programs for USAID here
Fixing Food Insecurity in Burkina Faso
This was the problem she gave the class
Fix food insecurity in Burkina Faso
So how would you solve this problem?
Simple solutions will never work; but why?
Wicked Problems
Food insecurity in West Africa is a classic example of what is called a wicked problem is a social or cultural problem that's difficult or impossible to solve because of its complex and interconnected nature, specifically for the four reasons that you see here
Characteristics of Wicked Problems
The term “wicked problem” came into common use in the 1970s, and has the characteristics that you see here
Based on these characteristics, not all hard-to-solve problems are wicked, only those with an indeterminate scope and scale. 
So most social problems—such as inequality, political instability, death, disease, or famine—are wicked.
The indeterminate scope and scale make wicked problems into what we would call a type of ill-defined problem
And as we will see, the way to address them is to create a list of opportunities
Reminder: What are Systems?
Wicked problems need to be understood as a type of systems problem
We looked at systems before and how they can be understood as a set of nested hierarchies
The goal then was to use those nested hierarchies as a way of exploring un-defined, and even ill-defined, problems
We will now take a more formal look at systems problems
So what is a system – a system is an interconnected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something
Therefore, all systems have three components – elements, interconnections, and a purpose
Implications
In short, a system is always more than the sum of its parts
Famous example: if you take the best parts of 20 different automobiles, can you put them together to make a super-automobile?
We improve systems not only by improving the efficiency of individual elements, but by improving the effectiveness of the interconnections, and even by re-thinking the purpose of the entire system
Verganti is an example of the possibilities here
Cause and Effect Diagrams
Systems can be mapped using causal loop diagrams and stock and flow diagrams
Both are designed to visually display cause and effect relationships
We are Embedded in a Larger System
As we saw earlier when looking at nested hierarchies, it is important to remember that whatever we are working on is embedded in a larger system
Our decisions are determined not only by the goals we have set, but by the goals and actions of others, as well as the side effects of both our own decisions and the action of others
Important – a systems map should make visual the distinction between intended actions and unintended consequences
The Building Blocks: Feedback Loops  
All casual loop diagrams are constructed from two building blocks:
Reinforcing loops – positive feedback loops; the change in one direction compounds 
Balancing loops which generate stability as they counteract the effects of reinforcing loops
Directions of Change
In other words, reinforcing loops and balancing loops have directions – same and opposite
Same means the second variable moves in the same direction as the first variable
Opposite means the second variable moves in the opposite direction as the first variable
WORK THROUGH EXAMPLES ON SLIDE
Example
Here is another small example
Notice how the goal comes from outside the loops
Example
And here is another example
WORK THROUGH EXAMPLES ON SLIDE (start with the R loop)
Reinforcing loops generate growth and collapse, in which the growth or collapse continues at an ever-increasing rate. A small change builds on itself, resulting in big changes after some time.
Balancing loops generate stability. Balancing processes generate the forces of resistance, which eventually limit growth.
You Try It – Where are the S’s and O’s?
Your turn
Stocks and Flows
The second type of diagram is a stocks and flows diagram
This is the classic example
The amount of the stock is obviously a function of the rate of the two flows
Stock and Flow Diagrams
Here is another simple example
WORK THROUGH EXAMPLE ON SLIDE
What is the causal connection? – interest, which increases the amount of deposits into the account
Causal Loop Diagrams and Stocks and Flows
Here is an example comparing the two kins of diagrams
Personally, I have always found causal loop diagrams to be more informative
But lots of people do not agree
Comparison of Stocks and Flows to Causal Loops
Here is a more complicated comparison looking at student learning problems and teacher turnover
Again, I find the causal loops clearer
Detailed Example
Here is a detailed example for fishery and ocean conservation
Click through ten times
The point is to watch how the systems map becomes ever more elaborate and ever more complex as subsystems are added
On the 11th slide:
But don’t lose sight of the power of systems thinking to conceptualize a problem, which then starts to give you a path to “solving” it using leverage points, which we will get to in a minute
Don’t lose sight of the big picture
I think that systems thinking works best when it is simple and clear
How to Reduce Frustration in Your Life?
As an example of simplicity and clarity, I found this online video, from a guy named 
Gene Bellinger
I have no idea who he is, but I think he makes a lot of sense
He begins with the idea that in order to reduce frustration in your life, you should begin your day with a pleasant breakfast
Notice how he changes S and O and plusses and minuses to real words
Systems diagrams tell a story, but he makes the story explicit, rather than cryptic
Then Add a Bird Feeder
Your breakfast would be made even more pleasant if you added a bird feeder to attract songbirds
After all, what is more pleasant and more calming than the lovely sounds of birds in the morning?
Positive Feedback Loop
The bird feeder clearly creates a positive feedback loop, making for a more pleasant breakfast which helps reduce your frustration and anxiety levels
All Good
It just gets better and better
The birds are lovely and in fact make the whole garden a more pleasant place, which makes breakfast more pleasant which starts your day off well
Unintended Consequences
But there are always unintended consequences
More birds mean more bird feed which means more trips to the store and more money which does not help reduce your anxiety
It Gets Worse
And it gets worse
More and more birds create more and more spillage of the feed which encourages unsightly growth around the bird feeder
And Worse
And from there it gets even “worser”
The spillage attracts rodents which definitely do not make for reduced levels of frustration and anxiety
And Worse
And worser still
Bird feeders always attract squirrels, which are nothing but bushy tailed rats and cause even more mess which brings even more rodents
Have I Really Reduced Frustration In My Life?
And of course, the more birds you have the more bird poop you get, which definitely does not reduce your anxiety
Anyway, I think this is an excellent way of using causal loop diagrams to tell a story
“Solving” a Systems Problem: Leverage Points
So now the question is what you do with the story
In other words, how do you solve a systems problem?
The key is to take advantage of leverage points to change the rate of flows in one or more of the loops
Increase the flow of the loops you want, and slow down the loops you don’t want
Find a place where a small change can make a big impact – 80/20 again
How to Use Leverage Points
The author Donella Meadows has written that leverage points go from the concrete to the conceptual
Leverage points can be used in the way you see here, but all give you a way to break the cycle, the overall direction of the system
Back to Burkina Faso
Go through example
The students first created a set of causal loop diagrams
Innovation comes from finding those leverage points
Possible Leverage Points
And then from those diagrams identified a set of leverage points
The key here is the idea that leverage point provide an opportunity to get at multiple root causes and create opportunities for innovation – products, services, policies
The Process
Here is a simplified view of the process
You cannot draw a systems map without some research
Examples
Here are some examples of wicked problems
Exercise
The key is the identification of and the design of the interconnections among the relevant subsystems



PORTFOLIO OF OPPORTUNITIES
Problem Types
So where are we
We have explored un-defined and ill-defined problems 
Now our goal is to use all this to create a bank of ideas, of opportunities
Reminder: Finding Opportunities is the Key
So what is an opportunity?
You can see the definition from the OED: “a time when a particular situation makes it possible to do or achieve something”
A chance to fix something that does not work as it should
A chance to create a new future
In other words, it is any un- or ill-defined problem that offers up something interesting enough that can be turned into a well-defined problem that can actually be solved, and hopefully used to create a better future
A Portfolio of Opportunities
One way to think about this idea of a portfolio comes from an interesting article published by McKinsey some years back
They argued that companies need to create a portfolio of innovation to reflect different time horizons
Now – make existing products better, faster cheaper; what we have called presentism – the problem is that this where the funding always is
New – what is the next product or service we can offer the market
Next – let’s disrupt our own business before competitors do
Think about it in terms of coffee
Now – how can we improve the taste of our leading brand of coffee
New – what new ways of brewing coffee can we develop
Next – what will replace coffee altogether
This makes perfect sense in a corporate environment – like our risk/uncertainty matrix, companies need to be playing across time and uncertainty horizons
Now: Incremental Improvements
Now is about small changes, incremental improvements, to keep customers engaged and buying
New: Ansoff Matrix
The simplest way to think about new is in terms of the Ansoff Matrix
New products and service offerings and new market segments
The Goal: Next Opportunities
But our goal in this class is neither Now nor New, but Next
Not small improvements, and adjacent markets, but the next big thing that will help create a different future
And in corporate environments, too little attention is paid to creating these types opportunities
Where are the Best Opportunities?
Next opportunities are almost certainly those that exploit higher technological or market uncertainty, while minimizing risk
Uncertainty always dissipates over time; and so it is uncertainty that gives entrepreneurs their chance, while others wait for the future to become clear
The Wow Factor
Your task now is to look back over the term and use the ideas you have generated (or completely different ones) to create a portfolio of opportunities, things that are interesting enough to turn into well-defined problems that can actually be solved
And then from your portfolio, which one would you pick to work on first
In other words, what is your best opportunity?
Impact, feasibility, personal preference, but  I think the key is surprise, the wow factor 
Exercise: Creating a Portfolio of Opportunities
Homework – identify your best opportunities
We will then start to turn them into well-defined problems
And validate them

WELL-DEFINED PROBLEMS
Problem Types
To repeat, innovation begins with finding problems worth solving
Those problems could be anything from the need to make small changes to a product, to identifying the company’s next blockbuster product, to how to take advantage of big changes occurring out there, to how wildly unpredictable futures could provide opportunities in the years to come
The first point is that these are all different kinds of problems
They exist on a continuum (hence the dotted lines), with different time horizons, different degrees of uncertainty, and they cannot all be addressed or “solved” in the same way
Un-defined problems are addressed by imagining different futures
Ill-defined problems are addressed by making lists, by trying to figure out what is the next big thing
They both help us build a portfolio of opportunities
But once you have the portfolio, the best ones need to be turned into well-defined problems so they can actually be solved
Which are the best ones? – there is no formula
If the best ones are highly uncertain, then the traditional tools for prioritizing projects, such as DCF, will not help us much
So pick the ones that call your name
An Important Well-Defined Problem
Again, the goal now is to turn the best of the portfolio into well-defined problems that can actually be solved
Being well-defined says nothing about the particular solution, which may be easy to come by or hard; think about radar and sonar
Only what the solution needs to deliver
There are no lists here – only something that works or does not
Look at these examples – they were all extremely important problems, and not hard to find
Finding submarines – sonar
Finding bombers and massing fighters against them – radar 
Quickly creating gunnery tables for artillery – computers
For these well-defined problems, the solution criteria were clear from the start, but incredibly difficult to find
Well-Defined Problems
Well-defined problems begin as opportunities, whether the clear sense that something does not work as it should or the idea that the future will be a very different kind of place where we will face very different kinds of problems
But whatever it is, all well-defined problems have falsifiable, specific, solutions
Example: How to get to the Moon and Back?
On the slide is a great example of a well-defined problem
There is nothing mysterious or confusing about it
But it is hard to do and complex (especially the part about getting him back)
What is also interesting and important here is not just that the problem got solved, but that the solution brought about a tsunami of innovations in its wake – you can easily google them
How to Prevent Skidding: Anti-Lock Brakes
Here is another example: the problem of skidding on wet or icy roads goes back to wagon days and was well-known
And the idea for anti-skid mechanisms in cars goes back to the early part of the 20th century
Companies all over the US and Europe devised contraptions that were later adapted to planes and trucks
What is the well-defined problem here?
The use case?  The needs statement?  The jobs-to-be-done statement?
How to automatically prevent cars from skidding on wet and icy roads
Anti-lock braking is a solution to a very clear problem, and the solution, once devised has been used to re-imagine a market space, what we have called an ill-defined problem – how to increase stability in automobiles, and has helped lead to the development of modern electronic control systems in cars
Or this, another old problem – How can I see what is behind my car?  The answer is a camera, but that answer can then be used to re-imagine a market space – how to increase automobile safety with all kinds of cameras and sensors
CHANGE SLIDES
Here are two more – patient compliance and how baseball can become America’s sport again
Or these:
How can we detect traumatic brain injury at the time of injury?
How can we detect internal bleeding at the time of injury?
Develop a Good Problem Statement
As you can see from the quote here, clearly defining a problem, creating a good jobs to be done statement, is the first critical step in solving any problem
You Have a Well-Defined Problem When…
Any well-defined problem must include what the solution needs to deliver as well as a clear use case
The Process
So how do you turn the best opportunities you have identified into well-defined problems that can actually be solved
Here are the steps
Research your opportunity, gather and organize what you find, disaggregate the problem in order to look for root causes, which then allows you to state the problem in terms of what a solution needs to deliver
Validate and iterate until you can put it all together in a clear sentence or two


Mind Mapping
A useful diagramming tool for putting your thoughts down on paper and organizing them into categories
Mind Mapping in XMind
This was the format we used in BME
You could also try MIRO, which is more multimedia and interactive
Exercise
Construct a quick map


The Key to Solving Any Problem
How do you solve a problem?
This is the classic formula from McKinsey for solving any problem and it is what consultants live by
The key to getting to a good problem statement is to take the problem apart; to disaggregate it
Disaggregate the Problem
Problems can be disaggregated into processes or components
So which comes first – definition or disaggregation – it is an iterative process
MECE
The key here is MECE
That the components need to be mutually exclusive and comprehensively exhaustive
The first is clear, the second not always so
Issue Trees
Issue trees are a must tool for doing MECE, for taking apart any problem so that you can solve it
DO THE EXAMPLE
The problem is that most people do not do MECE; they make their trees overlapping
Exercise
Prepare an issue tree
80/20 Rule
The 80/20 rule, also known as Pareto’s Principle, named after the 19th century Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto
It gives us a way of prioritizing the branches of our issue tree so that we focus on the things that actually matter
You can then gather the necessary data for the things that matter
And then synthesize the data to start coming up with solutions that will actually address the problem
Exercise: Solving the Problem of Medication Errors
Now you try it
Medication errors (not medical errors in general) are a big problem, reputedly killing up to quarter of a million people in the US annually; although the research shows that the problem may be bigger in the US than other developed countries
There is nothing unclear about this problem
So how would you solve it?  And what interesting new problems could your solution address?
Hints:
Be careful of non-MECE trees
Process flow better than a tree


Finding the Root Cause 
A key goal of disaggregating problems through issue trees, mind maps, and MECE is to help us get at the root causes of well-defined problems
There are lots of techniques that are useful here:
GO THROUGH SLIDES
The five why’s
The five w’s
Fishbone diagrams using M’s, P’s, and S’s
Bottom line – getting at root causes helps us to not only define the problem clearly, but to start to imagine what a solution might look like
Exercise
Find the root cause of…
Use any of the techniques we just briefly mentioned
Exercise
Choose a problem
Find the root cause of the problem
Use issue trees to disaggregate the problem

Reminder: Creating a Well-Defined Problem
To summarize, no problem can be solved in the traditional sense of the word unless it is well-defined
Innovation may start with thinking about un-defined and ill-defined problems, but they do not lend themselves to what we normally mean by solutions
They are simply ways of finding problems worth solving
But if you want to create a solution that can be built and sold and that will change the world, then you are going to have to define it clearly
Disaggregate, 
MECE, 
Find root causes
Determine solution criteria
Write a clear needs statement
Validate
And then do it all over again and again
Until it’s right and you have the next big thing
Deliverable
This is the first part of the end of term deliverable

Jobs to be Done Statements
The section gives you some more information on creating a good jobs to be done statement
Example
A well-defined problem means you have a good problem statement that makes clear the solution criteria, i.e. the specific outcomes expected
And should include the characteristics that you see here on the slide
Job to be Done: Cutting a Piece of Wood
Any task can be disaggregated into component steps using process mapping
Remember to think about how important the outcome is to you and how well-satisfied you are with current products, services and policies
Each step can then be analyzed in terms of a direction of improvement – minimize or maximize
Any step that can be improved is a problem to be solved
Some of those problems could be trivial
And some could be windows onto something big – it is a matter of judgment
Summary: Mapping Outcomes
A job map is a visual depiction of the core functional job, deconstructed into its discrete process or job steps, which explains in detail exactly what the customer is trying to get done. 
A desired outcome statement includes a direction of improvement, a performance metric (usually time or likelihood), an object of control (the desired outcome), and a contextual clarifier (describing the context in which the outcome is desired).
We will use jobs to be done as a way of creating well-defined problems
Examples of Job Statements
Here are some examples
Process mapping, stakeholder analysis, and competitor analysis can also help here
The last four statements need to be better defined, but you get the picture
Exercise
For your best opportunity, the task now is to create a good jobs-to-be-done statement


Brainstorming Solutions
Babson Technique
The power of magical thinking when looking for a solution
SIT
The power of thinking inside the box
Limits force us to be creative

CONCLUSION OF THE TERM: PROBLEM, SOLUTION, BUSINESS CASE
ARINC’s Model
Three parts of any innovation project – problem, solution, business case
Is it real?
Can we win?
Is it worth it?
And all three must be validated.  And make you re-think.
As you validate the solution, it should make you re-think the problem, and as you validate the business case, it should make you re-think the solution
How do you validate – research and talk to people
Peter Thiel’s View
Again, what are we looking for? – something with enough uncertainty (market and technological) that it could be the NEXT big thing
That’s we are not looking to replicate what is out there (e.g., the next Google) but create the next monopoly, the goal of all business
According to Peter Thiel, every  is unique, but they usually share some combination of the following characteristics: proprietary technology, network effects, economies of scale, and branding 
But branding is the result of market strength, not its cause
The Value Proposition
The core of the business case is the ability to develop and define a compelling reason to buy your specific solution, as compared to alternatives (and there are always alternatives)
A reason to buy is the very definition of a value proposition
Per ARINC: A B2B Value Proposition
For B2B solutions, defining a value proposition should be fairly straightforward and eminently rational
This thing helps improve our bottom line – it increases revenue and/or decreases costs
The problem becomes much more difficult when we are dealing with consumer products and services; not to mention changes in government policies
The Value Proposition: Pains and Gains
Value propositions can most simply be framed in terms of pains and gains
What you are adding and what you are ameliorating
And, of course, these need to be understood in terms of what you are actually trying to accomplish, the job you are trying to do, the progress you are trying to make in your life
Deliverable: Problem, Solution, Business Case
This is the final term report
A clear problem statement
A clear sense of what the solution must deliver
And the beginnings of the business case, which you will frame in terms of a Mullins Model
GO THROUGH SLIDES
This is the end of term assignment to prepare you for Jan and spring term


January Term
From Opportunity to Well-Defined Problem
The goal of January work is to 
Continue defining the problem
And validate that the problem is real
And to start thinking about the solution
And to start thinking about the first parts of the business plan
Round 1: Summary of Idea
We will use the business plan template as a guiding principle for the remainder of the year
You will take a first crack at this over January
The competition itself has two rounds
The first is very simple, exactly what you see here
We will skip the video until the start of the spring term
This is really all you need to get into the competition
Round 2: Business Plan
This starts the second round of the competition where you will have to write a formal plan
The first part is the background of your idea
Where did this problem come from?
What are the trends, technological and social, that make this problem important
Round 2: Business Plan
The next part is a clear statement of the well-defined problem that you are attempting to solve
Who specifically has this problem
And how do you know this problem is real?  
Validation is critical, starting now.
If you talk to people, and you do not end up changing somehow someway your idea, then you did not do it right
Round 2: Business Plan
The next part of the template and what you need to do over January is a description of your proposed solution
Once you have a well-defined problem, you can actually solve it.  What does your solution look like?
And why is it superior to alternatives?  There are always alternatives.
Your problem can always be thought of as a job-to-be-done.
People are struggling with something – your goal is to help them do that job better, in the biggest sense of the word.
What is Your Workplan for the Spring Term?
The last part of your work over January is to start to think about a workplan
What exactly do you propose to accomplish before the end of the spring term?
A good way to think about it all is to use some version of a business model canvas




